was sailing for the gold-mines. he was astride this bolsa, with a
small parcel of bread and meat done up in a piece of cloth; another
piece of cloth, such as we used for making our signal-stations, he
had fixed into a sail; and with a paddle he was directing his
precarious craft right out into the broad bay, to follow the
general direction of the schooners and boats that he knew were
ascending the sacramento river. he was about a hundred yards from
the shore. i jerked up my gun, and hailed him to come back. after a
moment's hesitation, he let go his sheet and began to paddle back.
this bolsa was nothing but a bundle of tule, or bullrush, bound
together with grass-ropes in the shape of a cigar, about ten feet
long and about two feet through the butt. with these the california
indiana cross streams of considerable size. when he came ashore, i
gave him a good overhauling for attempting to desert, and put him
to work getting breakfast. in due time we returned him to his ship,
the ohio. subsequently, i made a bargain with mr. hartnell to
survey his ranch at cosnmnes river, sacramento valley. ord and a
young citizen, named seton, were associated with me in this. i
bought of rodman m. price a surveyor's compass, chain, etc., and,
in san francisco, a small wagon and harness. availing ourselves of
a schooner, chartered to carry major miller and two companies of
the second infantry from san francisco to stockton, we got up to
our destination at little cost. i recall an occurrence that
happened when the schooner was anchored in carquinez straits,
opposite the soldiers' camp on shore. we were waiting for daylight
and a fair wind; the schooner lay anchored at an ebb-tide, and
about daylight ord and i had gone ashore for something. just as we
were pulling off from shore, we heard the loud shouts of the men,
and saw them all running down toward the water. our attention thus
drawn, we saw something swimming in the water, and pulled toward
it, thinking it a coyote; but we soon recognized a large grizzly
bear, swimming directly across the channel. not having any weapon,
we hurriedly pulled for the schooner, calling out, as we neared it,
"a bear! a bear!" it so happened that major miller was on deck,
washing his face and hands. he ran rapidly to the bow of the
vessel, took the musket from the hands of the sentinel, and fired
at the bear, as he passed but a short distance ahead of the
schooner. the bear rose, made a growl or howl, but continued his
course. as we scrambled up the port-aide to get our guns, the mate,
with a crew, happened to have a boat on the starboard-aide, and,
armed only with a hatchet, they pulled up alongside the bear, and
the mate struck him in the head with the hatchet. the bear turned,
tried to get into the boat, but the mate struck his claws with
repeated blows, and made him let go. after several passes with him,
the mate actually killed the bear, got a rope round him, and towed
him alongside the schooner, where he was hoisted on deck. the
carcass weighed over six hundred pounds. it was found that major
miller's shot had struck the bear in the lower jaw, and thus
disabled him. had it not been for this, the bear would certainly
have upset the boat and drowned all in it. as it was, however, his
meat served us a good turn in our trip up to stockton. at stockton
we disembarked our wagon, provisions, and instruments. there i
bought two fine mules at three hundred dollars each, and we hitched
up and started for the coaumnes river. about twelve miles off was
the mokelumne, a wide, bold stream, with a canoe as a ferry-boat.
we took our wagon to pieces, and ferried it and its contents
across, and then drove our mules into the water. in crossing, one
mule became entangled in the rope of the other, and for a time we
thought he was a gone mule; but at last he revived and we hitched
up. the mules were both pack-animals; neither had ever before seen
a wagon. young seton also was about as green, and had never handled
a mule. we put on the harness, and began to hitch them in, when one
of the mules turned his head, saw the wagon, and started. we held
on tight, but the beast did not stop until he had shivered the
tongue-pole into a dozen fragments. the fact was, that seton had
hitched the traces before he had put on the blind-bridle. there was
considerable swearing done, but that would not mend the pole. there
was no place nearer than sutter's fort to repair damages, so we
were put to our wits' end. we first sent back a mile or so, and
bought a raw-hide. gathering up the fragments of the pole and
cutting the hide into strips, we finished it in the rudest manner.
as long as the hide was green, the pole was very shaky; but
gradually the sun dried the hide, tightened it, and the pole
actually held for about a month. this cost us nearly a day of
delay; but, when damages were repaired, we harnessed up again, and
reached the crossing of the cosumnes, where our survey was to
begin. the expediente, or title-papers, of the ranch described it
as containing nine or eleven leagues on the cosumnes, south side,
and between the san joaquin river and sierra nevada mountains. we
began at the place where the road crosses the cosumnes, and laid
down a line four miles south, perpendicular to the general
direction of the stream; then, surveying up the stream, we marked
each mile so as to admit of a subdivision of one mile by four. the
land was dry and very poor, with the exception of here and there
some small pieces of bottom land, the great bulk of the bottom-land
occurring on the north side of the stream. we continued the survey
up some twenty miles into the hills above the mill of dailor and
sheldon. it took about a month to make this survey, which, when
finished, was duly plotted; and for it we received one-tenth of the
land, or two subdivisions. ord and i took the land, and we paid
seton for his labor in cash. by the sale of my share of the land,
subsequently, i realized three thousand dollars. after finishing
hartnell's survey, we crossed over to dailor's, and did some work
for him at five hundred dollars a day for the party. having
finished our work on the cosumnes, we proceeded to sacramento,
where captain sutter employed us to connect the survey of
sacramento city, made by lieutenant warner, and that of
sutterville, three miles below, which was then being surveyed by
lieutenant j. w. davidson, of the first dragoons. at sutterville,
the plateau of the sacramento approached quite near the river, and
it would have made a better site for a town than the low, submerged
land where the city now stands; but it seems to be a law of growth
that all natural advantages are disregarded wherever once business
chooses a location. old sutter's embarcadero became sacramento
city, simply because it was the first point used for unloading
boats for sutter's fort, just as the site for san francisco was
fixed by the use of yerba buena as the hide-landing for the mission
of "san francisco de asis."
i invested my earnings in this survey in three lots in
sacramento city, on which i made a fair profit by a sale to one
mcnulty, of mansfield, ohio. i only had a two months' leave of
absence, during which general smith, his staff, and a retinue of
civil friends, were making a tour of the gold-mines, and hearing
that he was en route back to his headquarters at sonoma, i knocked
off my work, sold my instruments, and left my wagon and mules with
my cousin charley hoyt, who had a store in sacramento, and was on
the point of moving up to a ranch, for which he had bargained, on
bear creek, on which was afterward established camp "far west." he
afterward sold the mules, wagon, etc., for me, and on the whole i
think i cleared, by those two months' work, about six thousand
dollars. i then returned to headquarters at sonoma, in time to
attend my fellow aide-de-camp gibbs through a long and dangerous
sickness, during which he was on board a store-ship, guarded by
captain george johnson, who now resides in san francisco. general
smith had agreed that on the first good opportunity he would send
me to the united states as a bearer of dispatches, but this he
could not do until he had made the examination of oregon, which was
also in his command. during the summer of  there continued to
pour into california a perfect stream of people. steamers came, and
a line was established from san francisco to sacramento, of which
the senator was the pioneer, charging sixteen dollars a passage,
and actually coining money. other boats were built out of materials
which had either come around cape horn or were brought from the
sandwich islands. wharves were built, houses were springing up as
if by magic, and the bay of san francisco presented as busy a scene
of life as any part of the world. major allen, of the
quartermaster's department, who had come out as chief-quartermaster
of the division, was building a large warehouse at benicia, with a
row of quarters, out of lumber at one hundred dollars per thousand
feet, and the work was done by men at sixteen dollars a day. i have
seen a detailed soldier, who got only his monthly pay of eight
dollars a month, and twenty cents a day for extra duty, nailing on
weather-boards and shingles, alongside a citizen who was paid
sixteen dollars a day. this was a real injustice, made the soldiers
discontented, and it was hardly to be wondered at that so many
deserted.
while the mass of people were busy at gold and in mammoth
speculations, a set of busy politicians were at work to secure the
prizes of civil government. gwin and fremont were there, and t.
butler king, of georgia, had come out from the east, scheming for
office. he staid with us at sonoma, and was generally regarded as
the government candidate for united states senator. general riley
as governor, and captain halleck as secretary of state, had issued
a proclamation for the election of a convention to frame a state
constitution. in due time the elections were held, and the
convention was assembled at monterey. dr. semple was elected
president; and gwin, sutter, halleck, butler king, sherwood,
gilbert, shannon, and others, were members. general smith took no
part in this convention, but sent me down to watch the proceedings,
and report to him. the only subject of interest was the slavery
question. there were no slaves then in california, save a few who
had come out as servants, but the southern people at that time
claimed their share of territory, out of that acquired by the
common labors of all sections of the union in the war with mexico.
still, in california there was little feeling on the subject. i
never heard general smith, who was a louisianian, express any
opinion about it. nor did butler king, of georgia, ever manifest
any particular interest in the matter. a committee was named to
draft a constitution, which in due time was reported, with the
usual clause, then known as the wilmot proviso, excluding slavery;
and during the debate which ensued very little opposition was made
to this clause, which was finally adopted by a large majority,
although the convention was made up in large part of men from our
southern states. this matter of california being a free state,
afterward, in the national congress, gave rise to angry debates,
which at one time threatened civil war. the result of the
convention was the election of state officers, and of the
legislature which sat in san jose in october and november, ,
and which elected fremont and gwin as the first united states
senators in congress from the pacific coast.
shortly after returning from monterey, i was sent by general
smith up to sacramento city to instruct lieutenants warner and
williamson, of the engineers, to push their surveys of the sierra
nevada mountains, for the purpose of ascertaining the possibility
of passing that range by a railroad, a subject that then elicited
universal interest. it was generally assumed that such a road could
not be made along any of the immigrant roads then in use, and
warner's orders were to look farther north up the feather river, or
some one of its tributaries. warner was engaged in this survey
during the summer and fall of , and had explored, to the very
end of goose lake, the source of feather river. then, leaving
williamson with the baggage and part of the men, he took about ten
men and a first-rate guide, crossed the summit to the east, and had
turned south, having the range of mountains on his right hand, with
the intention of regaining his camp by another pass in the
mountain. the party was strung out, single file, with wide spaces
between, warner ahead. he had just crossed a small valley and
ascended one of the spurs covered with sage-brush and rocks, when a
band of indians rose up and poured in a shower of arrows. the mule
turned and ran back to the valley, where warner fell off dead,
punctured by five arrows. the mule also died. the guide, who was
near to warner, was mortally wounded; and one or two men had arrows
in their bodies, but recovered. the party gathered about warner's
body, in sight of the indians, who whooped and yelled, but did not
venture away from their cover of rocks. this party of men remained
there all day without burying the bodies, and at night, by a wide
circuit, passed the mountain, and reached williamson's camp. the
news of warner's death cast a gloom over all the old californians,
who knew him well. he was a careful, prudent, and honest officer,
well qualified for his business, and extremely accurate in all his
work. he and i had been intimately associated during our four years
together in california, and i felt his loss deeply. the season was
then too far advanced to attempt to avenge his death, and it was
not until the next spring that a party was sent out to gather up
and bury his scattered bones.
as winter approached, the immigrants overland came pouring into
california, dusty and worn with their two thousand miles of weary
travel across the plains and mountains. those who arrived in
october and november reported thousands still behind them, with
oxen perishing, and short of food. appeals were made for help, and
general smith resolved to attempt relief. major rucker, who had
come across with pike. graham's battalion of dragoons, had
exchanged with major fitzgerald, of the quartermaster's department,
and was detailed to conduct this relief. general smith ordered him
to be supplied with one hundred thousand dollars out of the civil
fund, subject to his control, and with this to purchase at
sacramento flour, bacon, etc., and to hire men and mules to send
out and meet the immigrants. major rucker fulfilled this duty
perfectly, sending out pack-trains loaded with food by the many
routes by which the immigrants were known to be approaching, went
out himself with one of these trains, and remained in the mountains
until the last immigrant had got in. no doubt this expedition saved
many a life which has since been most useful to the country. i
remained at sacramento a good part of the fall of , recognizing
among the immigrants many of my old personal friends—john c.
fall, william king, sam stambaugh, hugh ewing, hampton denman, etc.
i got rucker to give these last two employment along with the train
for the relief of the immigrants. they had proposed to begin a
ranch on my land on the cosumnes, but afterward changed their
minds, and went out with rucker.
while i was at sacramento general smith had gone on his
contemplated trip to oregon, and promised that he would be back in
december, when he would send me home with dispatches. accordingly,
as the winter and rainy season was at hand, i went to san
francisco, and spent some time at the presidio, waiting patiently
for general smith's return. about christmas a vessel arrived from
oregon with the dispatches, and an order for me to deliver them in
person to general winfield scott, in new york city. general smith
had sent them down, remaining in oregon for a time. of course i was
all ready, and others of our set were going home by the same
conveyance, viz., rucker, ord, a. j. smith—some under orders,
and the others on leave. wanting to see my old friends in monterey,
i arranged for my passage in the steamer of january , , paying
six hundred dollars for passage to new york, and went down to
monterey by land, rucker accompanying me. the weather was unusually
rainy, and all the plain about santa clara was under water; but we
reached monterey in time. i again was welcomed by my friends, dona
augustias, manuelita, and the family, and it was resolved that i
should take two of the boys home with me and put them at georgetown
college for education, viz., antonio and porfirio, thirteen and
eleven years old. the dona gave me a bag of gold-dust to pay for
their passage and to deposit at the college. on the d day of
january punctually appeared the steamer oregon.
we were all soon on board and off for home. at that time the
steamers touched at san diego, acapulco, and panama. our passage
down the coast was unusually pleasant. arrived at panama, we hired
mules and rode across to gorgona, on the cruces river, where we
hired a boat and paddled down to the mouth of the river, off which
lay the steamer crescent city. it usually took four days to cross
the isthmus, every passenger taking care of himself, and it was
really funny to watch the efforts of women and men unaccustomed to
mules. it was an old song to us, and the trip across was easy and
interesting. in due time we were rowed off to the crescent city,
rolling back and forth in the swell, and we scrambled aboard by a
"jacob's ladder" from the stern. some of the women had to be
hoisted aboard by lowering a tub from the end of a boom; fun to us
who looked on, but awkward enough to the poor women, especially to
a very fat one, who attracted much notice. general fremont, wife
and child (lillie) were passengers with us down from san francisco;
but mrs. fremont not being well, they remained over one trip at
panama.
senator gwin was one of our passengers, and went through to new
york. we reached new york about the close of january, after a safe
and pleasant trip. our party, composed of ord, a. j. smith, and
rucker, with the two boys, antonio and porfirio, put up at
delmonico's, on bowling green; and, as soon as we had cleaned up
somewhat, i took a carriage, went to general scott's office in
ninth street, delivered my dispatches, was ordered to dine with him
next day, and then went forth to hunt up my old friends and
relations, the scotts, hoyts, etc., etc.
on reaching new york, most of us had rough soldier's clothing,
but we soon got a new outfit, and i dined with general scott's
family, mrs. scott being present, and also their son-in-law and
daughter (colonel and mrs. h. l. scott). the general questioned me
pretty closely in regard to things on the pacific coast, especially
the politics, and startled me with the assertion that "our country
was on the eve of a terrible civil war." he interested me by
anecdotes of my old army comrades in his recent battles around the
city of mexico, and i felt deeply the fact that our country had
passed through a foreign war, that my comrades had fought great
battles, and yet i had not heard a hostile shot. of course, i
thought it the last and only chance in my day, and that my career
as a soldier was at an end. after some four or five days spent in
new york, i was, by an order of general scott, sent to washington,
to lay before the secretary of war (crawford, of georgia) the
dispatches which i had brought from california. on reaching
washington, i found that mr. ewing was secretary of the interior,
and i at once became a member of his family. the family occupied
the house of mr. blair, on pennsylvania avenue, directly in front
of the war department. i immediately repaired to the war
department, and placed my dispatches in the hands of mr. crawford,
who questioned me somewhat about california, but seemed little
interested in the subject, except so far as it related to slavery
and the routes through texas. i then went to call on the president
at the white house. i found major bliss, who had been my teacher in
mathematics at west point, and was then general taylor's son-in-law
and private secretary. he took me into the room, now used by the
president's private secretaries, where president taylor was. i had
never seen him before, though i had served under him in florida in
-', and was most agreeably surprised at his fine personal
appearance, and his pleasant, easy manners. he received me with
great kindness, told me that colonel mason had mentioned my name
with praise, and that he would be pleased to do me any act of
favor. we were with him nearly an hour, talking about california
generally, and of his personal friends, persifer smith, riley,
canby, and others: although general scott was generally regarded by
the army as the most accomplished soldier of the mexican war, yet
general taylor had that blunt, honest, and stern character, that
endeared him to the masses of the people, and made him president.
bliss, too, had gained a large fame by his marked skill and
intelligence as an adjutant-general and military adviser. his
manner was very unmilitary, and in his talk he stammered and
hesitated, so as to make an unfavorable impression on a stranger;
but he was wonderfully accurate and skillful with his pen, and his
orders and letters form a model of military precision and
clearness.
having returned from california in january, , with
dispatches for the war department, and having delivered them in
person first to general scott in new york city, and afterward to
the secretary of war (crawford) in washington city, i applied for
and received a leave of absence for six months. i first visited my
mother, then living at mansfield, ohio, and returned to washington,
where, on the st day of may, , i was married to miss ellen
boyle ewing, daughter of the hon. thomas ewing, secretary of the
interior. the marriage ceremony was attended by a large and
distinguished company, embracing daniel webster, henry clay, t. h.
benton, president taylor, and all his cabinet. this occurred at the
house of mr. ewing, the same now owned and occupied by mr. f. p.
blair, senior, on pennsylvania avenue, opposite the war department.
we made a wedding tour to baltimore, new york, niagara, and ohio,
and returned to washington by the st of july. general taylor
participated in the celebration of the fourth of july, a very hot
day, by hearing a long speech from the hon. henry s. foote, at the
base of the washington monument. returning from the celebration
much heated and fatigued, he partook too freely of his favorite
iced milk with cherries, and during that night was seized with a
severe colic, which by morning had quite prostrated him. it was
said that he sent for his son-in-law, surgeon wood, united states
army, stationed in baltimore, and declined medical assistance from
anybody else. mr. ewing visited him several times, and was
manifestly uneasy and anxious, as was also his son-in-law, major
bliss, then of the army, and his confidential secretary. he rapidly
grew worse, and died in about four days.
at that time there was a high state of political feeling
pervading the country, on account of the questions growing out of
the new territories just acquired from mexico by the war. congress
was in session, and general taylor's sudden death evidently created
great alarm. i was present in the senate-gallery, and saw the oath
of office administered to the vice-president, mr. fillmore, a man
of splendid physical proportions and commanding appearance; but on
the faces of senators and people could easily be read the feelings
of doubt and uncertainty that prevailed. all knew that a change in
the cabinet and general policy was likely to result, but at the
time it was supposed that mr. fillmore, whose home was in buffalo,
would be less liberal than general taylor to the politicians of the
south, who feared, or pretended to fear, a crusade against slavery;
or, as was the political cry of the day, that slavery would be
prohibited in the territories and in the places exclusively under
the jurisdiction of the united states. events, however, proved the
contrary.
i attended general taylor's funeral as a sort of aide-decamp, at
the request of the adjutant-general of the army, roger jones, whose
brother, a militia-general, commanded the escort, composed of
militia and some regulars. among the regulars i recall the names of
captains john sedgwick and w. f. barry.
hardly was general taylor decently buried in the congressional
cemetery when the political struggle recommenced, and it became
manifest that mr. fillmore favored the general compromise then
known as henry clay's "omnibus bill," and that a general change of
cabinet would at once occur: webster was to succeed mr. clayton as
secretary of state, corwin to succeed mr. meredith as secretary of
the treasury, and a. h. h. stuart to succeed mr. ewing as secretary
of the interior. mr. ewing, however, was immediately appointed by
the governor of the state to succeed corwin in the senate. these
changes made it necessary for mr. ewing to discontinue
house-keeping, and mr. corwin took his home and furniture off his
hands. i escorted the family out to their home in lancaster, ohio;
but, before this had occurred, some most interesting debates took
place in the senate, which i regularly attended, and heard clay,
benton, foots, king of alabama, dayton, and the many real orators
of that day. mr. calhoun was in his seat, but he was evidently
approaching his end, for he was pale and feeble in the extreme. i
heard mr. webster's last speech on the floor of the senate, under
circumstances that warrant a description. it was publicly known
that he was to leave the senate, and enter the new cabinet of mr.
fillmore, as his secretary of state, and that prior to leaving he
was to make a great speech on the "omnibus bill." resolved to hear
it, i went up to the capitol on the day named, an hour or so
earlier than usual. the speech was to be delivered in the old
senate-chamber, now used by the supreme court. the galleries were
much smaller than at present, and i found them full to overflowing,
with a dense crowd about the door, struggling to reach the stairs.
i could not get near, and then tried the reporters' gallery, but
found it equally crowded; so i feared i should lose the only
possible opportunity to hear mr. webster.
i had only a limited personal acquaintance with any of the
senators, but had met mr. corwin quite often at mr. ewing's house,
and i also knew that he had been extremely friendly to my father in
his lifetime; so i ventured to send in to him my card, "w. t. s.,
first-lieutenant, third artillery." he came to the door promptly,
when i said, "mr. corwin, i believe mr. webster is to speak
to-day." his answer was, "yes, he has the floor at one o'clock." i
then added that i was extremely anxious to hear him. "well," said
he, "why don't you go into the gallery?" i explained that it was
full, and i had tried every access, but found all jammed with
people. "well," said he, "what do you want of me?" i explained that
i would like him to take me on the floor of the senate; that i had
often seen from the gallery persons on the floor, no better
entitled to it than i. he then asked in his quizzical way, "are you
a foreign embassador?" "no." "are you the governor of a state?"
"no." "are you a member of the other house?" "certainly not" "have
you ever had a vote of thanks by name?" "no!" "well, these are the
only privileged members." i then told him he knew well enough who i
was, and that if he chose he could take me in. he then said, "have
you any impudence?" i told him, "a reasonable amount if occasion
called for it." "do you think you could become so interested in my
conversation as not to notice the door-keeper?" (pointing to him).
i told him that there was not the least doubt of it, if he would
tell me one of his funny stories. he then took my arm, and led me a
turn in the vestibule, talking about some indifferent matter, but
all the time directing my looks to his left hand, toward which he
was gesticulating with his right; and thus we approached the
door-keeper, who began asking me, "foreign ambassador? governor of
a state? member of congress?" etc.; but i caught corwin's eye,
which said plainly, "don't mind him, pay attention to me," and in
this way we entered the senate-chamber by a side-door. once in,
corwin said, "now you can take care of yourself," and i thanked him
cordially.
i found a seat close behind mr. webster, and near general scott,
and heard the whole of the speech. it was heavy in the extreme, and
i confess that i was disappointed and tired long before it was
finished. no doubt the speech was full of fact and argument, but it
had none of the fire of oratory, or intensity of feeling, that
marked all of mr. clay's efforts.
toward the end of july, as before stated, all the family went
home to lancaster. congress was still in session, and the bill
adding four captains to the commissary department had not passed,
but was reasonably certain to, and i was equally sure of being one
of them. at that time my name was on the muster-roll of (light)
company c, third artillery (bragg's), stationed at jefferson
barracks, near st. louis. but, as there was cholera at st. louis,
on application, i was permitted to delay joining my company until
september. early in that month, i proceeded to cincinnati, and
thence by steamboat to st. louis, and then to jefferson barracks,
where i reported for duty to captain and brevet-colonel braxton
bragg, commanding (light) company c, third artillery. the other
officers of the company were first-lieutenant james a. hardie, and
afterward haekaliah brown. new horses had just been purchased for
the battery, and we were preparing for work, when the mail brought
the orders announcing the passage of the bill increasing the
commissary department by four captains, to which were promoted
captains shiras, blair, sherman, and bowen. i was ordered to take
post at st. louis, and to relieve captain a. j. smith, first
dragoons, who had been acting in that capacity for some months. my
commission bore date september ,. i proceeded forthwith to
the city, relieved captain smith, and entered on the discharge of
the duties of the office.
colonel n. s. clarke, sixth infantry, commanded the department;
major d. c. buell was adjutant-general, and captain w. s. hancock
was regimental quartermaster; colonel thomas swords was the depot
quartermaster, and we had our offices in the same building, on the
corner of washington avenue and second. subsequently major s. van
vliet relieved colonel swords. i remained at the planters' house
until my family arrived, when we occupied a house on chouteau
avenue, near twelfth.
during the spring and summer of , mr. ewing and mr. henry
stoddard, of dayton, ohio, a cousin of my father, were much in st.
louis, on business connected with the estate of major amos
stoddard, who was of the old army, as early as the beginning of
this century. he was stationed at the village of st. louis at the
time of the louisiana purchase, and when lewis and clarke made
their famous expedition across the continent to the columbia river.
major stoddard at that early day had purchased a small farm back of
the village, of some spaniard or frenchman, but, as he was a
bachelor, and was killed at fort meigs, ohio, during the war of
, the title was for many years lost sight of, and the farm was
covered over by other claims and by occupants. as st. louis began
to grow, his brothers and sisters, and their descendants, concluded
to look up the property. after much and fruitless litigation, they
at last retained mr. stoddard, of dayton, who in turn employed mr.
ewing, and these, after many years of labor, established the title,
and in the summer of  they were put in possession by the united
states marshal. the ground was laid off, the city survey extended
over it, and the whole was sold in partition. i made some
purchases, and acquired an interest, which i have retained more or
less ever since.
we continued to reside in st. louis throughout the year ,
and in the spring of  i had occasion to visit fort leavenworth
on duty, partly to inspect a lot of cattle which a mr. gordon, of
cass county, had contracted to deliver in new mexico, to enable
colonel sumner to attempt his scheme of making the soldiers in new
mexico self-supporting, by raising their own meat, and in a measure
their own vegetables. i found fort leavenworth then, as now, a most
beautiful spot, but in the midst of a wild indian country. there
were no whites settled in what is now the state of kansas. weston,
in missouri, was the great town, and speculation in town-lots there
and thereabout burnt the fingers of some of the army-officers, who
wanted to plant their scanty dollars in a fruitful soil. i rode on
horseback over to gordon's farm, saw the cattle, concluded the
bargain, and returned by way of independence, missouri. at
independence i found f. x. aubrey, a noted man of that day, who had
just made a celebrated ride of six hundred miles in six days. that
spring the united states quartermaster, major l. c. easton, at fort
union, new mexico, had occasion to send some message east by a
certain date, and contracted with aubrey to carry it to the nearest
post-office (then independence, missouri), making his compensation
conditional on the time consumed. he was supplied with a good
horse, and an order on the outgoing trains for an exchange. though
the whole route was infested with hostile indians, and not a house
on it, aubrey started alone with his rifle. he was fortunate in
meeting several outward-bound trains, and there, by made frequent
changes of horses, some four or five, and reached independence in
six days, having hardly rested or slept the whole way. of course,
he was extremely fatigued, and said there was an opinion among the
wild indians that if a man "sleeps out his sleep," after such
extreme exhaustion, he will never awake; and, accordingly, he
instructed his landlord to wake him up after eight hours of sleep.
when aroused at last, he saw by the clock that he had been asleep
twenty hours, and he was dreadfully angry, threatened to murder his
landlord, who protested he had tried in every way to get him up,
but found it impossible, and had let him "sleep it out" aubrey, in
describing his sensations to me, said he took it for granted he was
a dead man; but in fact he sustained no ill effects, and was off
again in a few days. i met him afterward often in california, and
always esteemed him one of the best samples of that bold race of
men who had grown up on the plains, along with the indians, in the
service of the fur companies. he was afterward, in , killed by
r. c. weightman, in a bar-room row, at santa fe, new mexico, where
he had just arrived from california.
in going from independence to fort leavenworth, i had to swim
milk creek, and sleep all night in a shawnee camp. the next day i
crossed the kaw or kansas river in a ferry boat, maintained by the
blacksmith of the tribe, and reached the fort in the evening. at
that day the whole region was unsettled, where now exist many rich
counties, highly cultivated, embracing several cities of from ten
to forty thousand inhabitants. from fort leavenworth i returned by
steamboat to st. louis.
in the summer of , my family went to lancaster, ohio; but i
remained at my post. late in the season, it was rumored that i was
to be transferred to new orleans, and in due time i learned the
cause. during a part of the mexican war, major seawell, of the
seventh infantry, had been acting commissary of subsistence at new
orleans, then the great depot of supplies for the troops in texas,
and of those operating beyond the rio grande. commissaries at that
time were allowed to purchase in open market, and were not
restricted to advertising and awarding contracts to the lowest
bidders. it was reported that major seawell had purchased largely
of the house of perry seawell & co., mr. seawell being a
relative of his. when he was relieved in his duties by major
waggman, of the regular commissary department, the latter found
perry seawell & co. so prompt and satisfactory that he
continued the patronage; for which there was a good reason, because
stores for the use of the troops at remote posts had to be packed
in a particular way, to bear transportation in wagons, or even on
pack-mules; and this firm had made extraordinary preparations for
this exclusive purpose. some time about , a brother of major
waggaman, who had been clerk to captain casey, commissary of
subsistence, at tampa bay, florida, was thrown out of office by the
death of the captain, and he naturally applied to his brother in
new orleans for employment; and he, in turn, referred him to his
friends, messrs. perry seawell & co. these first employed him
as a clerk, and afterward admitted him as a partner. thus it
resulted, in fact, that major waggaman was dealing largely, if not
exclusively, with a firm of which his brother was a partner.
one day, as general twiggs was coming across lake pontchartrain,
he fell in with one of his old cronies, who was an extensive
grocer. this gentleman gradually led the conversation to the
downward tendency of the times since he and twiggs were young,
saying that, in former years, all the merchants of new orleans had
a chance at government patronage; but now, in order to sell to the
army commissary, one had to take a brother in as a partner. general
twiggs resented this, but the merchant again affirmed it, and gave
names. as soon as general twiggs reached his office, he instructed
his adjutant-general, colonel bliss—who told me this—to
address a categorical note of inquiry to major waggaman. the major
very frankly stated the facts as they had arisen, and insisted that
the firm of perry seawell & co. had enjoyed a large patronage,
but deserved it richly by reason of their promptness, fairness, and
fidelity. the correspondence was sent to washington, and the result
was, that major waggaman was ordered to st. louis, and i was
ordered to new orleans.
i went down to new orleans in a steamboat in the month of
september, , taking with me a clerk, and, on arrival, assumed
the office, in a bank-building facing lafayette square, in which
were the offices of all the army departments. general d. twiggs was
in command of the department, with colonel w. w. s. bliss
(son-in-law of general taylor) as his adjutant-general. colonel a.
c. myers was quartermaster, captain john f. reynolds aide-de-camp,
and colonel a. j. coffee paymaster. i took rooms at the st. louis
hotel, kept by a most excellent gentleman, colonel mudge.
mr. perry seawell came to me in person, soliciting a continuance
of the custom which he had theretofore enjoyed; but i told him
frankly that a change was necessary, and i never saw or heard of
him afterward. i simply purchased in open market, arranged for the
proper packing of the stores, and had not the least difficulty in
supplying the troops and satisfying the head of the department in
washington.
about christmas, i had notice that my family, consisting of mrs.
sherman, two children, and nurse, with my sister fanny (now mrs.
moulton, of cincinnati, ohio), were en route for new orleans by
steam-packet; so i hired a house on magazine street, and furnished
it. almost at the moment of their arrival, also came from st. louis
my personal friend major turner, with a parcel of documents, which,
on examination, proved to be articles of copartnership for a bank
in california under the title of "lucas, turner & co.," in
which my name was embraced as a partner. major turner was, at the
time, actually en route for new york, to embark for san francisco,
to inaugurate the bank, in the nature of a branch of the firm
already existing at st. louis under the name of "lucas &
symonds." we discussed the matter very fully, and he left with me
the papers for reflection, and went on to new york and
california.
shortly after arrived james h. lucas, esq., the principal of the
banking-firm in st. louis, a most honorable and wealthy gentleman.
he further explained the full programme of the branch in
california; that my name had been included at the insistence of
major turner, who was a man of family and property in st. louis,
unwilling to remain long in san francisco, and who wanted me to
succeed him there. he offered me a very tempting income, with an
interest that would accumulate and grow. he also disclosed to me
that, in establishing a branch in california, he was influenced by
the apparent prosperity of page, bacon & co., and further that
he had received the principal data, on which he had founded the
scheme, from b. r. nisbet, who was then a teller in the firm of
page, bacon & co., of san francisco; that he also was to be
taken in as a partner, and was fully competent to manage all the
details of the business; but, as nisbet was comparatively young,
mr. lucas wanted me to reside in san francisco permanently, as the
head of the firm. all these matters were fully discussed, and i
agreed to apply for a six months' leave of absence, go to san
francisco, see for myself, and be governed by appearances there. i
accordingly, with general twiggs's approval, applied to the
adjutant-general for a six months' leave, which was granted; and
captain john f. reynolds was named to perform my duties during my
absence.
during the stay of my family in new orleans, we enjoyed the
society of the families of general twiggs, colonel myers, and
colonel bliss, as also of many citizens, among whom was the wife of
mr. day, sister to my brother-in-law, judge bartley. general twiggs
was then one of the oldest officers of the army. his history
extended back to the war of , and he had served in early days
with general jackson in florida and in the creek campaigns. he had
fine powers of description, and often entertained us, at his
office, with accounts of his experiences in the earlier settlements
of the southwest. colonel bliss had been general taylor's adjutant
in the mexican war, and was universally regarded as one of the most
finished and accomplished scholars in the army, and his wife was a
most agreeable and accomplished lady.
late in february, i dispatched my family up to ohio in the
steamboat tecumseh (captain pearce); disposed of my house and
furniture; turned over to major reynolds the funds, property, and
records of the office; and took passage in a small steamer for
nicaragua, en route for california. we embarked early in march, and
in seven days reached greytown, where we united with the passengers
from new york, and proceeded, by the nicaragua river and lake, for
the pacific ocean. the river was low, and the little steam
canal-boats, four in number, grounded often, so that the passengers
had to get into the water, to help them over the bare. in all there
were about six hundred passengers, of whom about sixty were women
and children. in four days we reached castillo, where there is a
decided fall, passed by a short railway, and above this fall we
were transferred to a larger boat, which carried us up the rest of
the river, and across the beautiful lake nicaragua, studded with
volcanic islands. landing at virgin bay, we rode on mules across to
san juan del sur, where lay at anchor the propeller s. s. lewis
(captain partridge, i think). passengers were carried through the
surf by natives to small boats, and rowed off to the lewis. the
weather was very hot, and quite a scramble followed for
state-rooms, especially for those on deck. i succeeded in reaching
the purser's office, got my ticket for a berth in one of the best
state-rooms on deck, and, just as i was turning from the window, a
lady who was a fellow-passenger from new orleans, a mrs. d-, called
to me to secure her and her lady friend berths on deck, saying that
those below were unendurable. i spoke to the purser, who, at the
moment perplexed by the crowd and clamor, answered: "i must put
their names down for the other two berths of your state-room; but,
as soon as the confusion is over, i will make some change whereby
you shall not suffer." as soon as these two women were assigned to
a state-room, they took possession, and i was left out. their names
were recorded as "captain sherman and ladies." as soon as things
were quieted down i remonstrated with the purser, who at last gave
me a lower berth in another and larger state-room on deck, with
five others, so that my two ladies had the state-room all to
themselves. at every meal the steward would come to me, and say,
"captain sherman, will you bring your ladies to the table?" and we
had the best seats in the ship.
this continued throughout the voyage, and i assert that "my
ladies" were of the most modest and best-behaved in the ship; but
some time after we had reached san francisco one of our
fellow-passengers came to me and inquired if i personally knew mrs.
d—-, with flaxen tresses, who sang so sweetly for us, and who
had come out under my especial escort. i replied i did not, more
than the chance acquaintance of the voyage, and what she herself
had told me, viz., that she expected to meet her husband, who lived
about mokelumne hill. he then informed me that she was a woman of
the town. society in california was then decidedly mixed. in due
season the steamship lewis got under weigh. she was a wooden ship,
long and narrow, bark-rigged, and a propeller; very slow, moving
not over eight miles an hour. we stopped at acapulco, and, in
eighteen days, passed in sight of point pinoa at monterey, and at
the speed we were traveling expected to reach san francisco at  a.
m. the next day. the cabin passengers, as was usual, bought of the
steward some champagne and cigars, and we had a sort of ovation for
the captain, purser, and surgeon of the ship, who were all very
clever fellows, though they had a slow and poor ship. late at night
all the passengers went to bed, expecting to enter the port at
daylight. i did not undress, as i thought the captain could and
would run in at night, and i lay down with my clothes on. about 
a. m. i was awakened by a bump and sort of grating of the vessel,
which i thought was our arrival at the wharf in san francisco; but
instantly the ship struck heavily; the engines stopped, and the
running to and fro on deck showed that something was wrong. in a
moment i was out of my state-room, at the bulwark, holding fast to
a stanchion, and looking over the side at the white and seething
water caused by her sudden and violent stoppage. the sea was
comparatively smooth, the night pitch-dark, and the fog deep and
impenetrable; the ship would rise with the swell, and come down
with a bump and quiver that was decidedly unpleasant. soon the
passengers were out of their rooms, undressed, calling for help,
and praying as though the ship were going to sink immediately. of
course she could not sink, being already on the bottom, and the
only question was as to the strength of hull to stand the bumping
and straining. great confusion for a time prevailed, but soon i
realized that the captain had taken all proper precautions to
secure his boats, of which there were six at the davits. these are
the first things that steerage-passengers make for in case of
shipwreck, and right over my head i heard the captain's voice say
in a low tone, but quite decided: "let go that falls, or, damn you,
i'll blow your head off!" this seemingly harsh language gave me
great comfort at the time, and on saying so to the captain
afterward, he explained that it was addressed to a passenger who
attempted to lower one of the boats. guards, composed of the crew,
were soon posted to prevent any interference with the boats, and
the officers circulated among the passengers the report that there
was no immediate danger; that, fortunately, the sea was smooth;
that we were simply aground, and must quietly await daylight.
they advised the passengers to keep quiet, and the ladies and
children to dress and sit at the doors of their state-rooms, there
to await the advice and action of the officers of the ship, who
were perfectly cool and self-possessed. meantime the ship was
working over a reef-for a time i feared she would break in two;
but, as the water gradually rose inside to a level with the sea
outside, the ship swung broadside to the swell, and all her keel
seemed to rest on the rock or sand. at no time did the sea break
over the deck—but the water below drove all the people up to
the main-deck and to the promenade-deck, and thus we remained for
about three hours, when daylight came; but there was a fog so thick
that nothing but water could be seen. the captain caused a boat to
be carefully lowered, put in her a trustworthy officer with a
boat-compass, and we saw her depart into the fog. during her
absence the ship's bell was kept tolling. then the fires were all
out, the ship full of water, and gradually breaking up, wriggling
with every swell like a willow basket—the sea all round us
full of the floating fragments of her sheeting, twisted and torn
into a spongy condition. in less than an hour the boat returned,
saying that the beach was quite near, not more than a mile away,
and had a good place for landing. all the boats were then carefully
lowered, and manned by crews belonging to the ship; a piece of the
gangway, on the leeward side, was cut away, and all the women, and
a few of the worst-scared men, were lowered into the boats, which
pulled for shore. in a comparatively short time the boats returned,
took new loads, and the debarkation was afterward carried on
quietly and systematically. no baggage was allowed to go on shore
except bags or parcels carried in the hands of passengers. at times
the fog lifted so that we could see from the wreck the tops of the
hills, and the outline of the shore; and i remember sitting on, the
upper or hurricane deck with the captain, who had his maps and
compass before him, and was trying to make out where the ship was.
i thought i recognized the outline of the hills below the mission
of dolores, and so stated to him; but he called my attention to the
fact that the general line of hills bore northwest, whereas the
coast south of san francisco bears due north and south. he
therefore concluded that the ship had overrun her reckoning, and
was then to the north of san francisco. he also explained that, the
passage up being longer than usual, viz., eighteen days, the coal
was short; that at the time the firemen were using some cut-up
spars along with the slack of coal, and that this fuel had made
more than usual steam, so that the ship must have glided along
faster than reckoned. this proved to be the actual case, for, in
fact, the steamship lewis was wrecked april , , on "duckworth
reef," baulinas bay, about eighteen miles above the entrance to san
francisco.
the captain had sent ashore the purser in the first boat, with
orders to work his way to the city as soon as possible, to report
the loss of his vessel, and to bring back help. i remained on the
wreck till among the last of the passengers, managing to get a can
of crackers and some sardines out of the submerged pantry, a thing
the rest of the passengers did not have, and then i went quietly
ashore in one of the boats. the passengers were all on the beach,
under a steep bluff; had built fires to dry their clothes, but had
seen no human being, and had no idea where they were. taking along
with me a fellow-passenger, a young chap about eighteen years old,
i scrambled up the bluff, and walked back toward the hills, in
hopes to get a good view of some known object. it was then the
month of april, and the hills were covered with the beautiful
grasses and flowers of that season of the year. we soon found horse
paths and tracks, and following them we came upon a drove of horses
grazing at large, some of which had saddle-marks. at about two
miles from the beach we found a corral; and thence, following one
of the strongest-marked paths, in about a mile more we descended
into a valley, and, on turning a sharp point, reached a board
shanty, with a horse picketed near by. four men were inside eating
a meal. i inquired if any of the lewis's people had been there;
they did not seem to understand what i meant when i explained to
them that about three miles from them, and beyond the old corral,
the steamer lewis was wrecked, and her passengers were on the
beach. i inquired where we were, and they answered, "at baulinas
creek;" that they were employed at a saw-mill just above, and were
engaged in shipping lumber to san francisco; that a schooner loaded
with lumber was then about two miles down the creek, waiting for
the tide to get out, and doubtless if we would walk down they would
take us on board.
i wrote a few words back to the captain, telling him where he
was, and that i would hurry to the city to send him help. my
companion and i their went on down the creek, and soon descried the
schooner anchored out in the stream. on being hailed, a small boat
came in and took us on board. the "captain" willingly agreed for a
small sum to carry us down to san francisco; and, as his whole crew
consisted of a small boy about twelve years old, we helped him to
get up his anchor and pole the schooner down the creek and out over
the bar on a high tide. this must have been about  p.m. once over
the bar, the sails were hoisted, and we glided along rapidly with a
strong, fair, northwest wind. the fog had lifted, so we could see
the shores plainly, and the entrance to the bay. in a couple of
hours we were entering the bay, and running "wing-and-wing."
outside the wind was simply the usual strong breeze; but, as it
passes through the head of the golden gate, it increases, and
there, too, we met a strong ebb-tide.
the schooner was loaded with lumber, much of which was on deck,
lashed down to ring bolts with raw-hide thongs. the captain was
steering, and i was reclining on the lumber, looking at the
familiar shore, as we approached fort point, when i heard a sort of
cry, and felt the schooner going over. as we got into the throat of
the "heads," the force of the wind, meeting a strong ebb-tide,
drove the nose of the schooner under water; she dove like a duck,
went over on her side, and began, to drift out with the tide. i
found myself in the water, mixed up with pieces of plank and ropes;
struck out, swam round to the stern, got on the keel, and clambered
up on the side. satisfied that she could not sink, by reason of her
cargo, i was not in the least alarmed, but thought two shipwrecks
in one day not a good beginning for a new, peaceful career. nobody
was drowned, however; the captain and crew were busy in securing
such articles as were liable to float off, and i looked out for
some passing boat or vessel to pick us up. we were drifting
steadily out to sea, while i was signaling to a boat about three
miles off, toward saucelito, and saw her tack and stand toward us.
i was busy watching this sail-boat, when i heard a yankee's voice,
close behind, saying, "this is a nice mess you've got yourselves
into," and looking about i saw a man in a small boat, who had seen
us upset, and had rowed out to us from a schooner anchored close
under the fort. some explanations were made, and when the sail-boat
coming from saucelito was near enough to be spoken to, and the
captain had engaged her to help his schooner, we bade him good by,
and got the man in the small boat-to carry us ashore, and land us
at the foot of the bluff, just below the fort. once there, i was at
home, and we footed it up to the presidio. of the sentinel i
inquired who was in command of the post, and was answered, "major
merchant." he was not then in, but his adjutant, lieutenant
gardner, was. i sent my card to him; he came out, and was much
surprised to find me covered with sand, and dripping with water, a
good specimen of a shipwrecked mariner. a few words of explanation
sufficed; horses were provided, and we rode hastily into the city,
reaching the office of the nicaragua steamship company (c. k.
garrison, agent) about dark, just as the purser had arrived; by a
totally different route. it was too late to send relief that night,
but by daylight next morning two steamers were en route for and
reached the place of wreck in time to relieve the passengers and
bring them, and most of the baggage. i lost my carpet-bag, but
saved my trunk. the lewis went to pieces the night after we got
off, and, had there been an average sea during the night of our
shipwreck, none of us probably would have escaped. that evening in
san francisco i hunted up major turner, whom i found boarding, in
company with general e. a. hitchcock, at a mrs. ross's, on clay
street, near powell. i took quarters with them, and began to make
my studies, with a view to a decision whether it was best to
undertake this new and untried scheme of banking, or to return to
new orleans and hold on to what i then had, a good army
commission.
at the time of my arrival, san francisco was an the top wave of
speculation and prosperity. major turner had rented at six hundred
dollars a month the office formerly used and then owned by adams
& co., on the east side of montgomery street, between
sacramento and california streets. b. r. nisbet was the active
partner, and james reilly the teller. already the bank of lucas,
turner & co. was established, and was engaged in selling bills
of exchange, receiving deposits, and loaning money at three per
cent. a month.
page, bacon & co., and adams & co., were in full blast
across the street, in parrott's new granite building, and other
bankers were doing seemingly a prosperous business, among them
wells, fargo & co.; drexel, sather & church; burgoyne &
co.; james king of win.; sanders & brenham; davidson & co.;
palmer, cook & co., and others. turner and i had rooms at mrs.
ross's, and took our meals at restaurants down-town, mostly at a
frenchman's named martin, on the southwest corner of montgomery and
california streets. general hitchcock, of the army, commanding the
department of california, usually messed with us; also a captain
mason, and lieutenant whiting, of the engineer corps. we soon
secured a small share of business, and became satisfied there was
room for profit. everybody seemed to be making money fast; the city
was being rapidly extended and improved; people paid their three
per cent. a month interest without fail, and without deeming it
excessive. turner, nisbet, and i, daily discussed the prospects,
and gradually settled down to the conviction that with two hundred
thousand dollars capital, and a credit of fifty thousand dollars in
new york, we could build up a business that would help the st.
louis house, and at the same time pay expenses in california, with
a reasonable profit. of course, turner never designed to remain
long in california, and i consented to go back to st. louis, confer
with mr. lucas and captain simonds, agree upon further details, and
then return permanently.
i have no memoranda by me now by which to determine the fact,
but think i returned to new york in july, , by the nicaragua
route, and thence to st. louis by way of lancaster, ohio, where my
family still was. mr. lucas promptly agreed to the terms proposed,
and further consented, on the expiration of the lease of the adams
& co. office, to erect a new banking-house in san francisco, to
cost fifty thousand dollars. i then returned to lancaster,
explained to mr. ewing and mrs. sherman all the details of our
agreement, and, meeting their approval, i sent to the
adjutant-general of the army my letter of resignation, to take
effect at the end of the six months' leave, and the resignation was
accepted, to take effect september , . being then a citizen, i
engaged a passage out to california by the nicaragua route, in the
steamer leaving new york september th, for myself and family, and
accordingly proceeded to new york, where i had a conference with
mr. meigs, cashier of the american exchange bank, and with messrs.
wadsworth & sheldon, bankers, who were our new york
correspondents; and on the th embarked for san juan del norte,
with the family, composed of mrs. sherman, lizzie, then less than a
year old, and her nurse, mary lynch. our passage down was
uneventful, and, on the boats up the nicaragua river, pretty much
the same as before. on reaching virgin bay, i engaged a native with
three mules to carry us across to the pacific, and as usual the
trip partook of the ludicrous—mrs. sherman mounted on a
donkey about as large as a newfoundland dog; mary lynch on another,
trying to carry lizzie on a pillow before her, but her mule had a
fashion of lying down, which scared her, till i exchanged mules,
and my california spurs kept that mule on his legs. i carried
lizzie some time till she was fast asleep, when i got our native
man to carry her awhile. the child woke up, and, finding herself in
the hands of a dark-visaged man, she yelled most lustily till i got
her away. at the summit of the pass, there was a clear-running
brook, where we rested an hour, and bathed lizzie in its sweet
waters. we then continued to the end of our journey, and, without
going to the tavern at san juan del sur, we passed directly to the
vessel, then at anchor about two miles out. to reach her we engaged
a native boat, which had to be kept outside the surf. mrs. sherman
was first taken in the arms of two stout natives; mary lynch,
carrying lizzie, was carried by two others; and i followed, mounted
on the back of a strapping fellow, while fifty or a hundred others
were running to and fro, cackling like geese.
mary lynch got scared at the surf, and began screaming like a
fool, when lizzie became convulsed with fear, and one of the
natives rushed to her, caught her out of mary's arms, and carried
her swiftly to mrs. sherman, who, by that time, was in the boat,
but lizzie had fainted with fear, and for a long time sobbed as
though permanently injured. for years she showed symptoms that made
us believe she had never entirely recovered from the effects of the
scare. in due time we reached the steamer sierra nevada, and got a
good state-room. our passage up the coast was pleasant enough; we
reached san francisco; on the th of october, and took quarters at
an hotel on stockton street, near broadway.
major turner remained till some time in november, when he also
departed for the east, leaving me and nisbet to manage the bank. i
endeavored to make myself familiar with the business, but of course
nisbet kept the books, and gave his personal attention to the
loans, discounts, and drafts, which yielded the profits. i soon
saw, however, that the three per cent. charged as premium on bills
of exchange was not all profit, but out of this had to come one and
a fourth to one and a half for freight, one and a third for
insurance, with some indefinite promise of a return premium; then,
the, cost of blanks, boxing of the bullion, etc., etc. indeed, i
saw no margin for profit at all. nisbet, however, who had long been
familiar with the business, insisted there was a profit, in the
fact that the gold-dust or bullion shipped was more valuable than
its cost to us. we, of course, had to remit bullion to meet our
bills on new york, and bought crude gold-dust, or bars refined by
kellogg & humbert or e. justh & co., for at that time the
united states mint was not in operation. but, as the reports of our
shipments came back from new york, i discovered that i was right,
and nisbet was wrong; and, although we could not help selling our
checks on new york and st. louis at the same price as other
bankers, i discovered that, at all events, the exchange business in
san francisco was rather a losing business than profitable. the
same as to loans. we could loan, at three per cent. a month, all
our own money, say two hundred and fifty thousand dollars, and a
part of our deposit account. this latter account in california was
decidedly uncertain. the balance due depositors would run down to a
mere nominal sum on steamer-days, which were the st and th of
each month, and then would increase till the next steamer-day, so
that we could not make use of any reasonable part of this balance
for loans beyond the next steamer-day; or, in other words, we had
an expensive bank, with expensive clerks, and all the machinery for
taking care of other people's money for their benefit, without
corresponding profit. i also saw that loans were attended with risk
commensurate with the rate; nevertheless, i could not attempt to
reform the rules and customs established by others before me, and
had to drift along with the rest toward that niagara that none
foresaw at the time.
shortly after arriving out in , we looked around for a site
for the new bank, and the only place then available on montgomery
street, the wall street of san francisco, was a lot at the corner
of jackson street, facing montgomery, with an alley on the north,
belonging to james lick. the ground was sixty by sixty-two feet,
and i had to pay for it thirty-two thousand dollars. i then made a
contract with the builders, keyser, & brown, to erect a
three-story brick building, with finished basement, for about fifty
thousand dollars. this made eighty-two thousand instead of fifty
thousand dollars, but i thought mr. lucas could stand it and would
approve, which he did, though it resulted in loss to him. after the
civil war, he told me he had sold the building for forty thousand
dollars, about half its cost, but luckily gold was then at , so
that he could use the forty thousand dollars gold as the equivalent
of one hundred thousand dollars currency. the building was erected;
i gave it my personal supervision, and it was strongly and
thoroughly built, for i saw it two years ago, when several
earthquakes had made no impression on it; still, the choice of site
was unfortunate, for the city drifted in the opposite direction,
viz., toward market street. i then thought that all the heavy
business would remain toward the foot of broadway and jackson
street, because there were the deepest water and best wharves, but
in this i made a mistake. nevertheless, in the spring of , the
new bank was finished, and we removed to it, paying rents
thereafter to our mr. lucas instead of to adams & co. a man
named wright, during the same season, built a still finer building
just across the street from us; pioche, bayerque & co. were
already established on another corner of jackson street, and the
new metropolitan theatre was in progress diagonally opposite us.
during the whole of  our business steadily grew, our average
deposits going up to half a million, and our sales of exchange and
consequent shipment of bullion averaging two hundred thousand
dollars per steamer. i signed all bills of exchange, and insisted
on nisbet consulting me on loans and discounts. spite of every
caution, however, we lost occasionally by bad loans, and worse by
the steady depreciation of real estate. the city of san francisco
was then extending her streets, sewering them, and planking them,
with three-inch lumber. in payment for the lumber and the work of
contractors, the city authorities paid scrip in even sums of one
hundred, five hundred, one thousand, and five thousand dollars.
these formed a favorite collateral for loans at from fifty to sixty
cents on the dollar, and no one doubted their ultimate value,
either by redemption or by being converted into city bonds. the
notes also of h. meiggs, neeley thompson & co., etc.,
lumber-dealers, were favorite notes, for they paid their interest
promptly, and lodged large margins of these street-improvement
warrants as collateral. at that time, meiggs was a prominent man,
lived in style in a large house on broadway, was a member of the
city council, and owned large saw-mills up the coast about
mendocino. in him nisbet had unbounded faith, but, for some reason,
i feared or mistrusted him, and remember that i cautioned nisbet
not to extend his credit, but to gradually contract his loans. on
looking over our bills receivable, then about six hundred thousand
dollars, i found meiggs, as principal or indorser, owed us about
eighty thousand dollars—all, however, secured by city
warrants; still, he kept bank accounts elsewhere, and was generally
a borrower. i instructed nisbet to insist on his reducing his line
as the notes matured, and, as he found it indelicate to speak to
meiggs, i instructed him to refer him to me; accordingly, when, on
the next steamer-day, meiggs appealed at the counter for a draft on
philadelphia, of about twenty thousand dollars, for which he
offered his note and collateral, he was referred to me, and i
explained to him that our draft was the same as money; that he
could have it for cash, but that we were already in advance to him
some seventy-five or eighty thousand dollars, and that instead of
increasing the amount i must insist on its reduction. he inquired
if i mistrusted his ability, etc. i explained, certainly not, but
that our duty was to assist those who did all their business with
us, and, as our means were necessarily limited, i must restrict him
to some reasonable sum, say, twenty-five thousand dollars. meiggs
invited me to go with him to a rich mercantile house on clay
street, whose partners belonged in hamburg, and there, in the
presence of the principals of the house, he demonstrated, as
clearly as a proposition in mathematics, that his business at
mendocino was based on calculations that could not fail. the bill
of exchange which he wanted, he said would make the last payment on
a propeller already built in philadelphia, which would be sent to
san francisco, to tow into and out of port the schooners and brigs
that were bringing his lumber down the coast. i admitted all he
said, but renewed my determination to limit his credit to
twenty-five thousand dollars. the hamburg firm then agreed to
accept for him the payment of all his debt to us, except the
twenty-five thousand dollars, payable in equal parts for the next
three steamer-days. accordingly, meiggs went back with me to our
bank, wrote his note for twenty-five thousand dollars, and secured
it by mortgage on real estate and city warrants, and substituted
the three acceptances of the hamburg firm for the overplus. i
surrendered to him all his former notes, except one for which he
was indorser. the three acceptances duly matured and were paid; one
morning meiggs and family were missing, and it was discovered they
had embarked in a sailing-vessel for south america. this was the
beginning of a series of failures in san francisco, that extended
through the next two years. as soon as it was known that meiggs had
fled, the town was full of rumors, and everybody was running to and
fro to secure his money. his debts amounted to nearly a million
dollars. the hamburg house which, had been humbugged, were heavy
losers and failed, i think. i took possession of meiggs's
dwelling-house and other property for which i held his mortgage,
and in the city warrants thought i had an overplus; but it
transpired that meiggs, being in the city council, had issued
various quantities of street scrip, which was adjudged a forgery,
though, beyond doubt, most of it, if not all, was properly signed,
but fraudulently issued. on this city scrip our bank must have lost
about ten thousand dollars. meiggs subsequently turned up in chili,
where again he rose to wealth and has paid much of his san
francisco debts, but none to us. he is now in peru, living like a
prince. with meiggs fell all the lumber-dealers, and many persons
dealing in city scrip. compared with others, our loss was a trifle.
in a short time things in san francisco resumed their wonted
course, and we generally laughed at the escapade of meiggs, and the
cursing of his deluded creditors.
shortly after our arrival in san francisco, i rented of a mr.
marryat, son of the english captain marryat, the author, a small
frame-house on stockton street, near green, buying of him his
furniture, and we removed to it about december ,. close by,
around on green street, a man named dickey was building two small
brick-houses, on ground which he had leased of nicholson. i bought
one of these houses, subject to the ground-rent, and moved into it
as soon as finished. lieutenant t. h. stevens, of the united states
navy, with his family, rented the other; we lived in this house
throughout the year , and up to april , .
during the winter of -', i received frequent intimations
in my letters from the st. louis house, that the bank of page,
bacon & co. was in trouble, growing out of their relations to
the ohio & mississippi railroad, to the contractors for
building which they had made large advances, to secure which they
had been compelled to take, as it were, an assignment of the
contract itself, and finally to assume all the liabilities of the
contractors. then they had to borrow money in new york, and raise
other money from time to time, in the purchase of iron and
materials for the road, and to pay the hands. the firm in st. louis
and that in san francisco were different, having different
partners, and the st. louis house naturally pressed the san
francisco firm to ship largely of "gold-dust," which gave them a
great name; also to keep as large a balance as possible in new york
to sustain their credit. mr. page was a very wealthy man, but his
wealth consisted mostly of land and property in st. louis. he was
an old man, and a good one; had been a baker, and knew little of
banking as a business. this part of his general business was
managed exclusively by his son-in-law, henry d. bacon, who was
young, handsome, and generally popular. how he was drawn into that
affair of the ohio & mississippi road i have no means of
knowing, except by hearsay. their business in new york was done
through the american exchange bank, and through duncan, sherman
& co. as we were rival houses, the st. louis partners removed
our account from the american exchange bank to the metropolitan
bank; and, as wadsworth & sheldon had failed, i was instructed
to deal in time bills, and in european exchange, with schnchardt
& gebhard, bankers in nassau street.
in california the house of page, bacon & co. was composed of
the same partners as in st. louis, with the addition of henry
haight, judge chambers, and young frank page. the latter had charge
of the "branch" in sacramento. haight was the real head-man, but he
was too fond of lager-beer to be in trusted with so large a
business. beyond all comparison, page, bacon & co. were the
most prominent bankers in california in -'. though i had
notice of danger in that quarter, from our partners in st. louis,
nobody in california doubted their wealth and stability. they must
have had, during that winter, an average deposit account of nearly
two million dollars, of which seven hundred thousand dollars was in
"certificates of deposit," the most stable of all accounts in a
bank. thousands of miners invested their earnings in such
certificates, which they converted into drafts on new york, when
they were ready to go home or wanted to send their "pile" to their
families. adams & co. were next in order, because of their
numerous offices scattered throughout the mining country. a
gentleman named haskell had been in charge of adams & co. in
san francisco, but in the winter of -' some changes were
made, and the banking department had been transferred to a
magnificent office in halleck's new metropolitan block. james king
of wm. had discontinued business on his own account, and been
employed by adams & co. as their cashier and banker, and isaiah
c. wood had succeeded haskell in chief control of the express
department. wells, fargo & co. were also bankers as well as
expressmen, and william j. pardee was the resident partner.
as the mail-steamer came in on february , , according to
her custom, she ran close to the long wharf (meiggs's) on north
beach, to throw ashore the express-parcels of news for speedy
delivery. some passenger on deck called to a man of his
acquaintance standing on the wharf, that page & bacon had
failed in new york. the news spread like wild-fire, but soon it was
met by the newspaper accounts to the effect that some particular
acceptances of page & bacon, of st. louis, in the hands of
duncan, sherman & co., in new york, had gone to protest. all
who had balances at page, bacon & co.'s, or held certificates
of deposit, were more or less alarmed, wanted to secure their
money, and a general excitement pervaded the whole community. word
was soon passed round that the matter admitted of explanation,
viz., that the two houses were distinct and separate concerns, that
every draft of the california house had been paid in new york, and
would continue to be paid. it was expected that this assertion
would quiet the fears of the california creditors, but for the next
three days there was a steady "run" on that bank. page, bacon &
co. stood the first day's run very well, and, as i afterward
learned, paid out about six hundred thousand dollars in gold coin.
on the th of february henry height came to our bank, to see what
help we were willing to give him; but i was out, and nisbet could
not answer positively for the firm. our condition was then very
strong. the deposit account was about six hundred thousand dollars,
and we had in our vault about five hundred thousand dollars in coin
and bullion, besides an equal amount of good bills receivable.
still i did not like to weaken ourselves to help others; but in a
most friendly spirit, that night after bank-hours, i went down to
page, bacon & co., and entered their office from the rear. i
found in the cashier's room folsom, parrott, dewey and payne,
captain ritchie, donohue, and others, citizens and friends of the
house, who had been called in for consultation. passing into the
main office, where all the book-keepers, tellers, etc., with
gas-lights, were busy writing up the day's work, i found mr. page,
henry height, and judge chambers. i spoke to height, saying that i
was sorry i had been out when he called at our bank, and had now
come to see him in the most friendly spirit. height had evidently
been drinking, and said abruptly that "all the banks would break,"
that "no bank could instantly pay all its obligations," etc. i
answered he could speak for himself, but not for me; that i had
come to offer to buy with cash a fair proportion of his bullion,
notes, and bills; but, if they were going to fail, i would not be
drawn in. height's manner was extremely offensive, but mr. page
tried to smooth it over, saying they had had a bad day's run, and
could not answer for the result till their books were written
up.
i passed back again into the room where the before-named
gentlemen were discussing some paper which lay before them, and was
going to pass out, when captain folsom, who was an officer of the
army, a class-mate and intimate friend of mine, handed me the paper
the contents of which they were discussing. it was very short, and
in henry haight's handwriting, pretty much in these terms: "we, the
undersigned property-holders of san francisco, having personally
examined the books, papers, etc., of page, bacon & co., do
hereby certify that the house is solvent and able to pay all its
debts," etc. height had drawn up and asked them to sign this paper,
with the intention to publish it in the next morning's papers, for
effect. while i was talking with captain folsom, height came into
the room to listen. i admitted that the effect of such a
publication would surely be good, and would probably stave off
immediate demand till their assets could be in part converted or
realized; but i naturally inquired of folsom, "have you personally
examined the accounts, as herein recited, and the assets, enough to
warrant your signature to this paper?" for, "thereby you in effect
become indorsers." folsom said they had not, when height turned on
me rudely and said, "do you think the affairs of such a house as
page, bacon & co. can be critically examined in an hour?" i
answered: "these gentlemen can do what they please, but they have
twelve hours before the bank will open on the morrow, and if the
ledger is written up" (as i believed it was or could be by
midnight), "they can (by counting the coin, bullion on hand, and
notes or stocks of immediate realization) approximate near enough
for them to indorse for the remainder." but height pooh-poohed me,
and i left. folsom followed me out, told me he could not afford to
imperil all he had, and asked my advice. i explained to him that my
partner nisbet had been educated and trained in that very house of
page, bacon & co.; that we kept our books exactly as they did;
that every day the ledger was written up, so that from it one could
see exactly how much actual money was due the depositors and
certificates; and then by counting the money in the vault,
estimating the bullion on hand, which, though not actual money,
could easily be converted into coin, and supplementing these
amounts by "bills receivable," they ought to arrive at an
approximate-result. after folsom had left me, john parrott also
stopped and talked with me to the same effect. next morning i
looked out for the notice, but no such notice appeared in the
morning papers, and i afterward learned that, on parrott and folsom
demanding an actual count of the money in the vault, haight angrily
refused unless they would accept his word for it, when one after
the other declined to sign his paper.
the run on page, bacon & co. therefore continued throughout
the st, and i expected all day to get an invitation to close our
bank for the next day, february , which we could have made a
holiday by concerted action; but each banker waited for page, bacon
& co. to ask for it, and, no such circular coming, in the then
state of feeling no other banker was willing to take the
initiative. on the morning of february , , everybody was
startled by receiving a small slip of paper, delivered at all the
houses, on which was printed a short notice that, for "want of
coin," page, bacon & co. found it necessary to close their bank
for a short time. of course, we all knew the consequences, and that
every other bank in san francisco would be tried. during the d we
all kept open, and watched our depositors closely; but the day was
generally observed by the people as a holiday, and the firemen
paraded the streets of san francisco in unusual strength. but, on
writing up our books that night, we found that our deposit account
had diminished about sixty-five thousand dollars. still, there was
no run on us, or any other of the banks, that day; yet, observing
little knots of men on the street, discussing the state of the
banks generally, and overhearing haight's expression quoted, that,
in case of the failure of page, bacon & co., "all the other
banks would break," i deemed it prudent to make ready. for some
days we had refused all loans and renewals, and we tried, without,
success, some of our call-loans; but, like hotspur's spirits, they
would not come.
our financial condition on that day (february , ) was: due
depositors and demand certificates, five hundred and twenty
thousand dollars; to meet which, we had in the vault: coin, three
hundred and eighty thousand dollars; bullion, seventy-five thousand
dollars; and bills receivable, about six hundred thousand dollars.
of these, at least one hundred thousand dollars were on demand,
with stock collaterals. therefore, for the extent of our business,
we were stronger than the bank of england, or any bank in new york
city.
before daylight next morning, our door-bell was rung, and i was
called down-stairs by e. casserly, esq. (an eminent lawyer of the
day, since united states senator), who informed me he had just come
up from the office of adams & co., to tell me that their
affairs were in such condition that they would not open that
morning at all; and that this, added to the suspension of page,
bacon & co., announced the day before, would surely cause a
general run on all the banks. i informed him that i expected as
much, and was prepared for it.
in going down to the bank that morning, i found montgomery
street full; but, punctually to the minute, the bank opened, and in
rushed the crowd. as usual, the most noisy and clamorous were men
and women who held small certificates; still, others with larger
accounts were in the crowd, pushing forward for their balances. all
were promptly met and paid. several gentlemen of my personal
acquaintance merely asked my word of honor that their money was
safe, and went away; others, who had large balances, and no
immediate use for coin, gladly accepted gold-bars, whereby we paid
out the seventy-five thousand dollars of bullion, relieving the
coin to that amount.
meantime, rumors from the street came pouring in that wright
& co. had failed; then wells, fargo & co.; then palmer,
cook & co., and indeed all, or nearly all, the banks of the
city; and i was told that parties on the street were betting high,
first, that we would close our doors at eleven o'clock; then
twelve, and so on; but we did not, till the usual hour that night.
we had paid every demand, and still had a respectable amount
left.
this run on the bank (the only one i ever experienced) presented
all the features, serious and comical, usual to such occasions. at
our counter happened that identical case, narrated of others, of
the frenchman, who was nearly squeezed to death in getting to the
counter, and, when he received his money, did not know what to do
with it. "if you got the money, i no want him; but if you no got
him, i want it like the devil!"
toward the close of the day, some of our customers deposited,
rather ostentatiously, small amounts, not aggregating more than
eight or ten thousand dollars. book-keepers and tellers were kept
at work to write up the books; and these showed:
due depositors and certificates, about one hundred and twenty
thousand dollars, for which remained of coin about fifty thousand
dollars. i resolved not to sleep until i had collected from those
owing the bank a part of their debts; for i was angry with them
that they had stood back and allowed the panic to fall on the banks
alone. among these were captain folsom, who owed us twenty-five
thousand dollars, secured by a mortgage on the american theatre and
tehama hotel; james smiley, contractor for building the
custom-house, who owed us two notes of twenty thousand and sixteen
thousand dollars, for which we held, as collateral, two acceptances
of the collector of the port, major r. p. hammond, for twenty
thousand dollars each; besides other private parties that i need
not name. the acceptances given to smiley were for work done on the
custom-house, but could not be paid until the work was actually
laid in the walls, and certified by major tower, united states
engineers; but smiley had an immense amount of granite, brick,
iron, etc., on the ground, in advance of construction, and these
acceptances were given him expressly that he might raise money
thereon for the payment of such materials.
therefore, as soon as i got my dinner, i took my saddle-horse,
and rode to captain folsom's house, where i found him in great pain
and distress, mental and physical. he was sitting in a chair, and
bathing his head with a sponge. i explained to him the object of my
visit, and he said he had expected it, and had already sent his
agent, van winkle, down-town, with instructions to raise what money
he could at any cost; but he did not succeed in raising a cent. so
great was the shock to public confidence, that men slept on their
money, and would not loan it for ten per cent. a week, on any
security whatever—even on mint certificates, which were as
good as gold, and only required about ten days to be paid in coin
by the united states mint. i then rode up to hammond's house, on
rincon hill, and found him there. i explained to him exactly
smiley's affairs, and only asked him to pay one of his acceptances.
he inquired, "why not both?" i answered that was so much the
better; it would put me under still greater obligations. he then
agreed to meet me at our bank at  p.m. i sent word to others that
i demanded them to pay what they could on their paper, and then
returned to the bank, to meet hammond. in due time, he came down
with palmer (of palmer, cook & co.), and there he met smiley,
who was, of course, very anxious to retire his notes. we there
discussed the matter fully, when hammond said, "sherman, give me up
my two acceptances, and i will substitute therefor my check of
forty thousand dollars," with "the distinct understanding that, if
the money is not needed by you, it shall be returned to me, and the
transaction then to remain statu quo." to this there was a general
assent. nisbet handed him his two acceptances, and he handed me his
check, signed as collector of the port, on major j. r. snyder,
united states treasurer, for forty thousand dollars. i afterward
rode out, that night, to major snyder's house on north beach, saw
him, and he agreed to meet me at  a.m. next day, at the united
states mint, and to pay the check, so that i could have the money
before the bank opened. the next morning, as agreed on, we met, and
he paid me the check in two sealed bags of gold-coin, each marked
twenty thousand dollars, which i had carried to the bank, but never
opened them, or even broke the seals.
that morning our bank opened as usual, but there was no
appearance of a continuation of the "run;" on the contrary, money
began to come back on deposit, so that by night we had a
considerable increase, and this went on from day to day, till
nearly the old condition of things returned. after about three
days, finding i had no use for the money obtained on hammond's
check, i took the identical two bags back to the cashier of the
custom-house, and recovered the two acceptances which had been
surrendered as described; and smiley's two notes were afterward
paid in their due course, out of the cash received on those
identical acceptances. but, years afterward, on settling with
hammond for the custom-house contract when completed, there was a
difference, and smiley sued lucas, turner & co. for money had
and received for his benefit, being the identical forty thousand
dollars herein explained, but he lost his case. hammond, too, was
afterward removed from office, and indicted in part for this
transaction. he was tried before the united states circuit court,
judge mcalister presiding, for a violation of the sub-treasury act,
but was acquitted. our bank, having thus passed so well through the
crisis, took at once a first rank; but these bank failures had
caused so many mercantile losses, and had led to such an utter
downfall in the value of real estate, that everybody lost more or
less money by bad debts, by depreciation of stocks and collaterals,
that became unsalable, if not worthless.
about this time (viz., february, ) i had exchanged my house
on green, street, with mr. sloat, for the half of a fifty-vara lot
on harrison street, between fremont and first, on which there was a
small cottage, and i had contracted for the building of a new
frame-house thereon, at six thousand dollars. this house was
finished on the th of april, and my family moved into it at
once.
for some time mrs. sherman had been anxious to go home to
lancaster, ohio, where we had left our daughter minnie, with her
grandparents, and we arranged that s. m. bowman, esq., and wife,
should move into our new house and board us, viz., lizzie, willie
with the nurse biddy, and myself, for a fair consideration. it so
happened that two of my personal friends, messrs. winters and
cunningham of marysville, and a young fellow named eagan, now a
captain in the commissary department, were going east in the
steamer of the middle of april, and that mr.. william h. aspinwall,
of new york, and mr. chauncey, of philadelphia, were also going
back; and they all offered to look to the personal comfort of mrs.
sherman on the voyage. they took passage in the steamer golden age
(commodore watkins), which sailed on april , . their passage
down the coast was very pleasant till within a day's distance of
panama, when one bright moonlit night, april th, the ship,
running at full speed, between the islands quibo and quicara,
struck on a sunken reef, tore out a streak in her bottom, and at
once began to fill with water. fortunately she did not sink fast,
but swung off into deep water, and commodore watkins happening to
be on deck at the moment, walking with mr. aspinwall, learning that
the water was rushing in with great rapidity, gave orders for a
full head of steam, and turned the vessel's bow straight for the
island quicara. the water rose rapidly in the hold, the passengers
were all assembled, fearful of going down, the fires were out, and
the last revolution of the wheels made, when her bow touched gently
on the beach, and the vessel's stern sank in deep water. lines were
got out, and the ship held in an upright position, so that the
passengers were safe, and but little incommoded. i have often heard
mrs. sherman tell of the boy eagan, then about fourteen years old,
coming to her state-room, and telling to her not to be afraid, as
he was a good swimmer; but on coming out into the cabin, partially
dressed, she felt more confidence in the cool manner, bearing, and
greater strength of mr. winters. there must have been nearly a
thousand souls on board at the time, few of whom could have been
saved had the steamer gone down in mid-channel, which surely would
have resulted, had not commodore watkins been on deck, or had he
been less prompt in his determination to beach his ship. a sailboat
was dispatched toward panama, which luckily met the steamer john t.
stephens, just coming out of the bay, loaded with about a thousand
passengers bound for san francisco, and she at once proceeded to
the relief of the golden age. her passengers were transferred in
small boats to the stephens, which vessel, with her two thousand
people crowded together with hardly standing-room, returned to
panama, whence the passengers for the east proceeded to their
destination without further delay. luckily for mrs. sherman, purser
goddard, an old ohio friend of ours, was on the stephens, and most
kindly gave up his own room to her, and such lady friends as she
included in her party. the golden age was afterward partially
repaired at quicara, pumped out, and steamed to panama, when, after
further repairs, she resumed her place in the line. i think she is
still in existence, but commodore watkins afterward lost his life
in china, by falling down a hatchway.
mrs. sherman returned in the latter part of november of the same
year, when mr. and mrs. bowman, who meantime had bought a lot next
to us and erected a house thereon, removed to it, and we thus
continued close neighbors and friends until we left the country for
good in .
during the summer of , in san francisco, occurred one of
those unhappy events, too common to new countries, in which i
became involved in spite of myself.
william neely johnson was governor of california, and resided at
sacramento city; general john e. wool commanded the department of
california, having succeeded general hitchcock, and had his
headquarters at benicia; and a mr. van ness was mayor of the city.
politics had become a regular and profitable business, and
politicians were more than suspected of being corrupt. it was
reported and currently believed that the sheriff (scannell) had
been required to pay the democratic central committee a hundred
thousand dollars for his nomination, which was equivalent to an
election, for an office of the nominal salary of twelve thousand
dollars a year for four years. in the election all sorts of
dishonesty were charged and believed, especially of "ballot-box
stuffing," and too generally the better classes avoided the
elections and dodged jury-duty, so that the affairs of the city
government necessarily passed into the hands of a low set of
professional politicians. among them was a man named james casey,
who edited a small paper, the printing office of which was in a
room on the third floor of our banking office. i hardly knew him by
sight, and rarely if ever saw his paper; but one day mr. sather, of
the excellent banking firm of drexel, sather & church, came to
me, and called my attention to an article in casey's paper so full
of falsehood and malice, that we construed it as an effort to
black-mail the banks generally. at that time we were all laboring
to restore confidence, which had been so rudely shaken by the
panic, and i went up-stairs, found casey, and pointed out to him
the objectionable nature of his article, told him plainly that i
could not tolerate his attempt to print and circulate slanders in
our building, and, if he repeated it, i would cause him and his
press to be thrown out of the windows. he took the hint and moved
to more friendly quarters. i mention this fact, to show my estimate
of the man, who became a figure in the drama i am about to
describe. james king of wm., as before explained, was in  a
banker on his own account, but some time in  he had closed out
his business, and engaged with adams & co. as cashier. when
this firm failed, he, in common with all the employees, was thrown
out of employment, and had to look around for something else. he
settled down to the publication of an evening paper, called the
bulletin, and, being a man of fine manners and address, he at once
constituted himself the champion of society against the public and
private characters whom he saw fit to arraign.
as might have been expected, this soon brought him into the
usual newspaper war with other editors, and especially with casey,
and epithets a la "eatanswill" were soon bandying back and forth
between them. one evening of may, , king published, in the
bulletin, copies of papers procured from new york, to show that
casey had once been sentenced to the state penitentiary at sing
sing. casey took mortal offense, and called at the bulletin office,
on the corner of montgomery and merchant streets, where he found
king, and violent words passed between them, resulting in casey
giving king notice that he would shoot him on sight. king remained
in his office till about  or  p.m., when he started toward his
home on stockton street, and, as he neared the corner of
washington, casey approached him from the opposite direction,
called to him, and began firing. king had on a short cloak, and in
his breast-pocket a small pistol, which he did not use. one of
casey's shots struck him high up in the breast, from which he
reeled, was caught by some passing friend, and carried into the
express-office on the corner, where he was laid on the counter; and
a surgeon sent for. casey escaped up washington street, went to the
city hall, and delivered himself to the sheriff (scannell), who
conveyed him to jail and locked him in a cell. meantime, the news
spread like wildfire, and all the city was in commotion, for grog
was very popular. nisbet, who boarded with us on harrison street,
had been delayed at the bank later than usual, so that he happened
to be near at the time, and, when he came out to dinner, he brought
me the news of this affair, and said that there was every
appearance of a riot downtown that night. this occurred toward the
evening of may , .
it so happened that, on the urgent solicitation of van winkle
and of governor johnson; i had only a few days before agreed to
accept the commission of major-general of the second division of
militia, embracing san francisco. i had received the commission,
but had not as yet formally accepted it, or even put myself in
communication with the volunteer companies of the city. of these,
at that moment of time, there was a company of artillery with four
guns, commanded by a captain johns, formerly of the army, and two
or three uniformed companies of infantry. after dinner i went down
town to see what was going on; found that king had been removed to
a room in the metropolitan block; that his life was in great peril;
that casey was safe in jail, and the sheriff had called to his
assistance a posse of the city police, some citizens, and one of
the militia companies. the people were gathered in groups on the
streets, and the words "vigilance committee" were freely spoken,
but i saw no signs of immediate violence. the next morning, i again
went to the jail, and found all things quiet, but the militia had
withdrawn. i then went to the city hall, saw the mayor, van ness,
and some of the city officials, agreed to do what i could to
maintain order with such militia as were on hand, and then formally
accepted the commission, and took the "oath."
in  (when i was not in california) there had been a
vigilance committee, and it was understood that its organization
still existed. all the newspapers took ground in favor of the
vigilance committee, except the herald (john nugent, editor), and
nearly all the best people favored that means of redress. i could
see they were organizing, hiring rendezvous, collecting arms, etc.,
without concealment. it was soon manifest that the companies of
volunteers would go with the "committee," and that the public
authorities could not rely on them for aid or defense. still, there
were a good many citizens who contended that, if the civil
authorities were properly sustained by the people at large, they
could and would execute the law. but the papers inflamed the public
mind, and the controversy spread to the country. about the third
day after the shooting of king, governor johnson telegraphed me
that he would be down in the evening boat, and asked me to meet him
on arrival for consultation. i got c. h. garrison to go with me,
and we met the governor and his brother on the wharf, and walked up
to the international hotel on jackson street, above montgomery. we
discussed the state of affairs fully; and johnson, on learning that
his particular friend, william t. coleman, was the president of the
vigilance committee, proposed to go and see him. en route we
stopped at king's room, ascertained that he was slowly sinking, and
could not live long; and then near midnight we walked to the
turnverein hall, where the committee was known to be sitting in
consultation. this hall was on bush street, at about the
intersection of stockton. it was all lighted up within, but the
door was locked. the governor knocked at the door, and on inquiry
from inside "who's there?"—gave his name. after some delay we
were admitted into a sort of vestibule, beyond which was a large
hall, and we could hear the suppressed voices of a multitude. we
were shown into a bar-room to the right, when the governor asked to
see coleman. the man left us, went into the main hall, and soon
returned with coleman, who was pale and agitated. after shaking
hands all round, the governor said, "coleman, what the devil is the
matter here?" coleman said, "governor, it is time this shooting on
our streets should stop." the governor replied, "i agree with you
perfectly, and have come down, from sacramento to assist." coleman
rejoined that "the people were tired of it, and had no faith in the
officers of the law." a general conversation then followed, in
which it was admitted that king would die, and that casey must be
executed; but the manner of execution was the thing to be settled,
coleman contending that the people would do it without trusting the
courts or the sheriff. it so happened that at that time judge
norton was on the bench of the court having jurisdiction, and he
was universally recognized as an able and upright man, whom no one
could or did mistrust; and it also happened that a grand-jury was
then in session. johnson argued that the time had passed in
california for mobs and vigilance committees, and said if coleman
and associates would use their influence to support the law, he
(the governor) would undertake that, as soon as king died, the
grand-jury should indict, that judge norton would try the murderer,
and the whole proceeding should be as speedy as decency would
allow. then coleman said "the people had no confidence in scannell,
the sheriff," who was, he said, in collusion with the rowdy element
of san francisco. johnson then offered to be personally responsible
that casey should be safely guarded, and should be forthcoming for
trial and execution at the proper time. i remember very well
johnson's assertion that he had no right to make these
stipulations, and maybe no power to fulfill them; but he did it to
save the city and state from the disgrace of a mob. coleman
disclaimed that the vigilance organization was a "mob," admitted
that the proposition of the governor was fair, and all he or any
one should ask; and added, if we would wait awhile, he would submit
it to the council, and bring back an answer.
we waited nearly an hour, and could hear the hum of voices in
the hall, but no words, when coleman came back, accompanied by a
committee, of which i think the two brothers arrington, thomas
smiley the auctioneer, seymour, truett, and others, were members.
the whole conversation was gone over again, and the governor's
proposition was positively agreed to, with this further condition,
that the vigilance committee should send into the jail a small
force of their own men, to make certain that casey should not be
carried off or allowed to escape.
the governor, his brother william, garrison, and i, then went up
to the jail, where we found the sheriff and his posse comitatus of
police and citizens. these were styled the "law-and-order party,"
and some of them took offense that the governor should have held
communication with the "damned rebels," and several of them left
the jail; but the sheriff seemed to agree with the governor that
what he had done was right and best; and, while we were there, some
eight or ten armed men arrived from the vigilance committee, and
were received by the sheriff (scannell) as a part of his regular
posse.
the governor then, near daylight, went to his hotel, and i to my
house for a short sleep. next day i was at the bank, as usual,
when, about noon the governor called, and asked me to walk with him
down-street he said he had just received a message from the
vigilance committee to the effect that they were not bound by
coleman's promise not to do any thing till the regular trial by
jury should be had, etc. he was with reason furious, and asked me
to go with him to truett's store, over which the executive
committee was said to be in session. we were admitted to a
front-room up-stairs, and heard voices in the back-room. the
governor inquired for coleman, but he was not forthcoming. another
of the committee, seymour, met us, denied in toto the promise of
the night before, and the governor openly accused him of treachery
and falsehood.
the quarrel became public, and the newspapers took it up, both
parties turning on the governor; one, the vigilantes, denying the
promise made by coleman, their president; and the other, the
"law-and-order party," refusing any farther assistance, because
johnson had stooped to make terms with rebels. at all events, he
was powerless, and had to let matters drift to a conclusion.
king died about friday, may th, and the funeral was appointed
for the next sunday. early on that day the governor sent for me at
my house. i found him on the roof of the international, from which
we looked down on the whole city, and more especially the face of
telegraph hill, which was already covered with a crowd of people,
while others were moving toward the jail on broadway. parties of
armed men, in good order, were marching by platoons in the same
direction; and formed in line along broadway, facing the jail-door.
soon a small party was seen to advance to this door, and knock; a
parley ensued, the doors were opened, and casey was led out. in a
few minutes another prisoner was brought out, who, proved to be
cora, a man who had once been tried for killing richardson, the
united states marshal, when the jury disagreed, and he was awaiting
a new trial. these prisoners were placed in carriages, and escorted
by the armed force down to the rooms of the vigilance committee,
through the principal streets of the city. the day was exceedingly
beautiful, and the whole proceeding was orderly in the extreme. i
was under the impression that casey and cora were hanged that same
sunday, but was probably in error; but in a very few days they were
hanged by the neck—dead—suspended from beams projecting
from the windows of the committee's rooms, without other trial than
could be given in secret, and by night.
we all thought the matter had ended there, and accordingly the
governor returned to sacramento in disgust, and i went about my
business. but it soon became manifest that the vigilance committee
had no intention to surrender the power thus usurped. they took a
building on clay street, near front, fortified it, employed guards
and armed sentinels, sat in midnight council, issued writs of
arrest and banishment, and utterly ignored all authority but their
own. a good many men were banished and forced to leave the country,
but they were of that class we could well spare. yankee sullivan, a
prisoner in their custody, committed suicide, and a feeling of
general insecurity pervaded the city. business was deranged; and
the bulletin, then under control of tom king, a brother of james,
poured out its abuse on some of our best men, as well as the worst.
governor johnson, being again appealed to, concluded to go to work
regularly, and telegraphed me about the st of june to meet him at
general wool's headquarters at benicia that night. i went up, and
we met at the hotel where general wool was boarding. johnson had
with him his secretary of state. we discussed the state of the
country generally, and i had agreed that if wool would give us arms
and ammunition out of the united states arsenal at benicia, and if
commodore farragat, of the navy, commanding the navy-yard on mare
island, would give us a ship, i would call out volunteers, and,
when a sufficient number had responded, i would have the arms come
down from benicia in the ship, arm my men, take possession of a
thirty-two-pound-gun battery at the marine hospital on rincon
point, thence command a dispersion of the unlawfully-armed force of
the vigilance committee, and arrest some of the leaders.
we played cards that night, carrying on a conversation, in which
wool insisted on a proclamation commanding the vigilance committee
to disperse, etc., and he told us how he had on some occasion, as
far back as , suppressed a mutiny on the northern frontier. i
did not understand him to make any distinct promise of assistance
that night, but he invited us to accompany him on an inspection of
the arsenal the next day, which we did. on handling some rifled
muskets in the arsenal storehouse he asked me how they would answer
our purpose. i said they were the very things, and that we did not
want cartridge boxes or belts, but that i would have the cartridges
carried in the breeches-pockets, and the caps in the vestpockets. i
knew that there were stored in that arsenal four thousand muskets,
for i recognized the boxes which we had carried out in the
lexington around cape horn in . afterward we all met at the
quarters of captain d. r. jones of the army, and i saw the
secretary of state, d. f. douglass, esq., walk out with general
wool in earnest conversation, and this secretary of state afterward
asserted that wool there and then promised us the arms and
ammunition, provided the governor would make his proclamation for
the committee to disperse, and that i should afterward call out the
militia, etc. on the way back to the hotel at benicia, general
wool, captain callendar of the arsenal, and i, were walking side by
side, and i was telling him (general wool) that i would also need
some ammunition for the thirty-two-pound guns then in position at
rineon point, when wool turned to callendar and inquired, "did i
not order those guns to be brought away?" callendar said "yes,
general. i made a requisition on the quartermaster for
transportation, but his schooner has been so busy that the guns are
still there." then said wool: "let them remain; we may have use for
them." i therefrom inferred, of course, that it was all agreed to
so far as he was concerned.
soon after we had reached the hotel, we ordered a buggy, and
governor johnson and i drove to vallejo, six miles, crossed over to
mare island, and walked up to the commandant's house, where we
found commodore farragut and his family. we stated our business
fairly, but the commodore answered very frankly that he had no
authority, without orders from his department, to take any part in
civil broils; he doubted the wisdom of the attempt; said he had no
ship available except the john adams, captain boutwell, and that
she needed repairs. but he assented at last, to the proposition to
let the sloop john adams drop down abreast of the city after
certain repairs, to lie off there for moral effect, which afterward
actually occurred.
we then returned to benicia, and wool's first question was,
"what luck?" we answered, "not much," and explained what commodore
farragut could and would do, and that, instead of having a naval
vessel, we would seize and use one of the pacific mail company's
steamers, lying at their dock in benicia, to carry down to san
francisco the arms and munitions when the time came.
as the time was then near at hand for the arrival of the evening
boats, we all walked down to the wharf together, where i told
johnson that he could not be too careful; that i had not heard
general wool make a positive promise of assistance.
upon this, johnson called general wool to one side, and we three
drew together. johnson said: "general wool, general sherman is very
particular, and wants to know exactly what you propose to do." wool
answered: "i understand, governor, that in the first place a writ
of habeas corpus will be issued commanding the jailers of the
vigilance committee to produce the body of some one of the
prisoners held by them (which, of course, will be refused); that
you then issue your proclamation commanding them to disperse, and,
failing this, you will call out the militia, and command general
sherman with it to suppress the vigilance committee as an unlawful
body;" to which the governor responded, "yes." "then," said wool,
"on general sherman's making his requisition, approved by you, i
will order the issue of the necessary arms and ammunition." i
remember well that i said, emphatically: "that is all i want.
—now, governor, you may go ahead." we soon parted; johnson
and douglas taking the boat to sacramento, and i to san
francisco.
the chief-justice, terry, came to san francisco the next day,
issued a writ of habeas corpus for the body of one maloney, which
writ was resisted, as we expected. the governor then issued his
proclamation, and i published my orders, dated june , . the
quartermaster-general of the state, general kibbe, also came to san
francisco, took an office in the city hall, engaged several rooms
for armories, and soon the men began to enroll into companies. in
my general orders calling out the militia, i used the expression,
"when a sufficient number of men are enrolled, arms and ammunition
will be supplied." some of the best men of the "vigilantes" came to
me and remonstrated, saying that collision would surely result;
that it would be terrible, etc. all i could say in reply was, that
it was for them to get out of the way. "remove your fort; cease
your midnight councils; and prevent your armed bodies from
patrolling the streets." they inquired where i was to get arms, and
i answered that i had them certain. but personally i went right
along with my business at the bank, conscious that at any moment we
might have trouble. another committee of citizens, a conciliatory
body, was formed to prevent collision if possible, and the
newspapers boiled over with vehement vituperation. this second
committee was composed of such men as crockett, ritchie, thornton,
bailey peyton, foote, donohue, kelly, and others, a class of the
most intelligent and wealthy men of the city, who earnestly and
honestly desired to prevent bloodshed. they also came to me, and i
told them that our men were enrolling very fast, and that, when i
deemed the right moment had come, the vigilance committee must
disperse, else bloodshed and destruction of property would
inevitably follow. they also had discovered that the better men of
the vigilance committee itself were getting tired of the business,
and thought that in the execution of casey and cora, and the
banishment of a dozen or more rowdies, they had done enough, and
were then willing to stop. it was suggested that, if our
law-and-order party would not arm, by a certain day near at hand
the committee would disperse, and some of their leaders would
submit to an indictment and trial by a jury of citizens, which they
knew would acquit them of crime. one day in the bank a man called
me to the counter and said, "if you expect to get arms of general
wool, you will be mistaken, for i was at benicia yesterday, and
heard him say he would not give them." this person was known to me
to be a man of truth, and i immediately wrote to general wool a
letter telling him what i had heard, and how any hesitation on his
part would compromise me as a man of truth and honor; adding that i
did not believe we should ever need the arms, but only the promise
of them, for "the committee was letting down, and would soon
disperse and submit to the law," etc. i further asked him to answer
me categorically that very night, by the stockton boat, which would
pass benicia on its way down about midnight, and i would sit up and
wait for his answer. i did wait for his letter, but it did not
come, and the next day i got a telegraphic dispatch from governor
johnson, who, at sacramento, had also heard of general wool's
"back-down," asking me to meet him again at benicia that night.
i went up in the evening boat, and found general wool's
aide-de-camp, captain arnold, of the army, on the wharf, with a
letter in his hand, which he said was for me. i asked for it, but
he said he knew its importance, and preferred we should go to
general wool's room together, and the general could hand it to me
in person. we did go right up to general wool's, who took the
sealed parcel and laid it aside, saying that it was literally a
copy of one he had sent to governor johnson, who would doubtless
give me a copy; but i insisted that i had made a written
communication, and was entitled to a written answer.
at that moment several gentlemen of the "conciliation party,"
who had come up in the same steamer with me, asked for admission
and came in. i recall the names of crockett, foote, bailey peyton,
judge thornton, donohue, etc., and the conversation became general,
wool trying to explain away the effect of our misunderstanding,
taking good pains not to deny his promise made to me personally on
the wharf. i renewed my application for the letter addressed to me,
then lying on his table. on my statement of the case, bailey peyton
said, "general wool, i think general sherman has a right to a
written answer from you, for he is surely compromised." upon this
wool handed me the letter. i opened and read it, and it denied any
promise of arms, but otherwise was extremely evasive and
non-committal. i had heard of the arrival at the wharf of the
governor and party, and was expecting them at wool's room, but,
instead of stopping at the hotel where we were, they passed to
another hotel on the block above. i went up and found there, in a
room on the second floor over the bar-room, governor johnson,
chief-justice terry, jones, of palmer, cooke & co., e. d.
baker, volney e. howard, and one or two others. all were talking
furiously against wool, denouncing him as a d—-d liar, and
not sparing the severest terms. i showed the governor general
wool's letter to me, which he said was in effect the same as the
one addressed to and received by him at sacramento. he was so
offended that he would not even call on general wool, and said he
would never again recognize him as an officer or gentleman. we
discussed matters generally, and judge terry said that the
vigilance committee were a set of d—-d pork-merchants; that
they were getting scared, and that general wool was in collusion
with them to bring the state into contempt, etc. i explained that
there were no arms in the state except what general wool had, or
what were in the hands of the vigilance committee of san francisco,
and that the part of wisdom for us was to be patient and cautious.
about that time crockett and his associates sent up their cards,
but terry and the more violent of the governor's followers
denounced them as no better than "vigilantes," and wanted the
governor to refuse even to receive them. i explained that they were
not "vigilantes," that judge thornton was a "law-and-order" man,
was one of the first to respond to the call of the sheriff, and
that he went actually to the jail with his one arm the night we
expected the first attempt at rescue, etc. johnson then sent word
for them to reduce their business to writing. they simply sent in a
written request for an audience, and they were then promptly
admitted. after some general conversation, the governor said he was
prepared to hear them, when mr. crockett rose and made a prepared
speech embracing a clear and fair statement of the condition of
things in san francisco, concluding with the assertion of the
willingness of the committee to disband and submit to trial after a
certain date not very remote. all the time crockett was speaking,
terry sat with his hat on, drawn over his eyes, and with his feet
on a table. as soon as crockett was through, they were dismissed,
and johnson began to prepare a written answer. this was scratched,
altered, and amended, to suit the notions of his counselors, and at
last was copied and sent. this answer amounted to little or
nothing. seeing that we were powerless for good, and that violent
counsels would prevail under the influence of terry and others, i
sat down at the table, and wrote my resignation, which johnson
accepted in a complimentary note on the spot, and at the same time
he appointed to my place general volney e. howard, then present, a
lawyer who had once been a member of congress from texas, and who
was expected to drive the d—-d pork-merchants into the bay at
short notice. i went soon after to general wool's room, where i
found crockett and the rest of his party; told them that i was out
of the fight, having resigned my commission; that i had neglected
business that had been intrusted to me by my st. louis partners;
and that i would thenceforward mind my own business, and leave
public affairs severely alone. we all returned to san francisco
that night by the stockton boat, and i never after-ward had any
thing to do with politics in california, perfectly satisfied with
that short experience. johnson and wool fought out their quarrel of
veracity in the newspapers and on paper. but, in my opinion, there
is not a shadow of doubt that general wool did deliberately deceive
us; that he had authority to issue arms, and that, had he adhered
to his promise, we could have checked the committee before it
became a fixed institution, and a part of the common law of
california. major-general volney e. howard came to san francisco
soon after; continued the organization of militia which i had
begun; succeeded in getting a few arms from the country; but one
day the vigilance committee sallied from their armories, captured
the arms of the "law-and-order party," put some of their men into
prison, while general howard, with others, escaped to the country;
after which the vigilance committee had it all their own way.
subsequently, in july, , they arrested chief-justice terry, and
tried him for stabbing one of their constables, but he managed to
escape at night, and took refuge on the john adams. in august, they
hanged hetherington and brace in broad daylight, without any
jury-trial; and, soon after, they quietly disbanded. as they
controlled the press, they wrote their own history, and the world
generally gives them the credit of having purged san francisco of
rowdies and roughs; but their success has given great stimulus to a
dangerous principle, that would at any time justify the mob in
seizing all the power of government; and who is to say that the
vigilance committee may not be composed of the worst, instead of
the best, elements of a community? indeed, in san francisco, as
soon as it was demonstrated that the real power had passed from the
city hall to the committee room, the same set of bailiffs,
constables, and rowdies that had infested the city hall were found
in the employment of the "vigilantes;" and, after three months
experience, the better class of people became tired of the midnight
sessions and left the business and power of the committee in the
hands of a court, of which a sydney man was reported to be the head
or chief-justice.
during the winter of -', and indeed throughout the year
, all kinds of business became unsettled in california. the
mines continued to yield about fifty millions of gold a year; but
little attention was paid to agriculture or to any business other
than that of "mining," and, as the placer-gold was becoming worked
out, the miners were restless and uneasy, and were shifting about
from place to place, impelled by rumors put afloat for speculative
purposes. a great many extensive enterprises by joint-stock
companies had been begun, in the way of water-ditches, to bring
water from the head of the mountain-streams down to the richer
alluvial deposits, and nearly all of these companies became
embarrassed or bankrupt. foreign capital, also, which had been
attracted to california by reason of the high rates of interest,
was being withdrawn, or was tied up in property which could not be
sold; and, although our bank's having withstood the panic gave us
great credit, still the community itself was shaken, and loans of
money were risky in the extreme. a great many merchants, of the
highest name, availed themselves of the extremely liberal bankrupt
law to get discharged of their old debts, without sacrificing much,
if any, of their stocks of goods on hand, except a lawyer's fee;
thus realizing martin burke's saying that "many a clever fellow had
been ruined by paying his debts." the merchants and business-men of
san francisco did not intend to be ruined by such a course. i
raised the rate of exchange from three to three and a half, while
others kept on at the old rate; and i labored hard to collect old
debts, and strove, in making new loans, to be on the safe side. the
state and city both denied much of their public debt; in fact,
repudiated it; and real estate, which the year before had been
first-class security, became utterly unsalable.
the office labor and confinement, and the anxiety attending the
business, aggravated my asthma to such an extent that at times it
deprived me of sleep, and threatened to become chronic and serious;
and i was also conscious that the first and original cause which
had induced mr. lucas to establish the bank in california had
ceased. i so reported to him, and that i really believed that he
could use his money more safely and to better advantage in st.
louis. this met his prompt approval, and he instructed me gradually
to draw out, preparatory to a removal to new york city.
accordingly, early in april, , i published an advertisement in
the san francisco papers, notifying our customers that, on the st
day of may, we would discontinue business and remove east,
requiring all to withdraw their accounts, and declaring that, if
any remained on that day of may, their balances would be
transferred to the banking-house of parrott & co. punctually to
the day, this was done, and the business of lucas, turner &
co., of san francisco, was discontinued, except the more difficult
and disagreeable part of collecting their own moneys and selling
the real estate, to which the firm had succeeded by purchase or
foreclosure. one of the partners, b. r. nisbet, assisted by our
attorney, s. m. bowman, esq., remained behind to close up the
business of the bank.
having closed the bank at san francisco on the st day of may,
, accompanied by my family i embarked in the steamer sonora for
panama, crossed the isthmus, and sailed to new york, whence we
proceeded to lancaster, ohio, where mrs. sherman and the family
stopped, and i went on to st. louis. i found there that some
changes had been made in the parent, house, that mr. lucas had
bought out his partner, captain symonds, and that the firm's name
had been changed to that of james h. lucas & co.
it had also been arranged that an office or branch was to be
established in new york city, of which i was to have charge, on
pretty much the same terms and conditions as in the previous san
francisco firm.
mr. lucas, major turner, and i, agreed to meet in new york, soon
after the th of july. we met accordingly at the metropolitan
hotel, selected an office, no.  pall street, purchased the
necessary furniture, and engaged a teller, bookkeeper, and porter.
the new firm was to bear the same title of lucas, turner & co.,
with about the same partners in interest, but the nature of the
business was totally different. we opened our office on the st of
july, , and at once began to receive accounts from the west and
from california, but our chief business was as the resident agents
of the st. louis firm of james h. lucas & co. personally i took
rooms at no.  prince street, in which house were also quartered
major j. g. barnard, and lieutenant j. b. mcpherson, united states
engineers, both of whom afterward attained great fame in the civil
war.
my business relations in new york were with the metropolitan
bank and bank of america; and with the very wealthy and most
respectable firm of schuchhardt & gebhard, of nassau street.
every thing went along swimmingly till the st of august, when all
wall street was thrown into a spasm by the failure of the ohio life
and trust company, and the panic so resembled that in san
francisco, that, having nothing seemingly at stake, i felt amused.
but it soon became a serious matter even to me. western stocks and
securities tumbled to such a figure, that all western banks that
held such securities, and had procured advances thereon, were
compelled to pay up or substitute increased collaterals. our own
house was not a borrower in new york at all, but many of our
western correspondents were, and it taxed my tune to watch their
interests. in september, the panic extended so as to threaten the
safety of even some of the new york banks not connected with the
west; and the alarm became general, and at last universal.
in the very midst of this panic came the news that the steamer
central america, formerly the george law, with six hundred
passengers and about sixteen hundred thousand dollars of treasure,
coming from aspinwall, had foundered at sea, off the coast of
georgia, and that about sixty of the passengers had been
providentially picked up by a swedish bark, and brought into
savannah. the absolute loss of this treasure went to swell the
confusion and panic of the day.
a few days after, i was standing in the vestibule of the
metropolitan hotel, and heard the captain of the swedish bark tell
his singular story of the rescue of these passengers. he was a
short, sailor-like-looking man, with a strong german or swedish
accent. he said that he was sailing from some port in honduras for
sweden, running down the gulf stream off savannah. the weather had
been heavy for some days, and, about nightfall, as he paced his
deck, he observed a man-of-war hawk circle about his vessel,
gradually lowering, until the bird was as it were aiming at him. he
jerked out a belaying-pin, struck at the bird, missed it, when the
hawk again rose high in the air, and a second time began to
descend, contract his circle, and make at him again. the second
time he hit the bird, and struck it to the deck.... this strange
fact made him uneasy, and he thought it betokened danger; he went
to the binnacle, saw the course he was steering, and without any
particular reason he ordered the steersman to alter the course one
point to the east.
after this it became quite dark, and he continued to promenade
the deck, and had settled into a drowsy state, when as in a dream
he thought he heard voices all round his ship. waking up, he ran to
the side of the ship, saw something struggling in the water, and
heard clearly cries for help. instantly heaving his ship to, and
lowering all his boats, he managed to pick up sixty or more persons
who were floating about on skylights, doors, spare, and whatever
fragments remained of the central america. had he not changed the
course of his vessel by reason of the mysterious conduct of that
man-of-war hawk, not a soul would probably have survived the night.
it was stated by the rescued passengers, among whom was billy
birch, that the central america had sailed from aspinwall with the
passengers and freight which left san francisco on the st of
september, and encountered the gale in the gulf stream somewhere
off savannah, in which she sprung a leak, filled rapidly, and went
down. the passengers who were saved had clung to doors, skylights,
and such floating objects as they could reach, and were thus
rescued; all the rest, some five hundred in number, had gone down
with the ship.
the panic grew worse and worse, and about the end of september
there was a general suspension of the banks of new york, and a
money crisis extended all over the country. in new york, lucas,
turner & co. had nothing at risk. we had large cash balances in
the metropolitan bank and in the bank of america, all safe, and we
held, for the account of the st. louis house, at least two hundred
thousand dollars, of st. louis city and county bonds, and of
acceptances falling due right along, none extending beyond ninety
days. i was advised from st. louis that money matters were
extremely tight; but i did not dream of any danger in that quarter.
i knew well that mr. lucas was worth two or three million dollars
in the best real estate, and inferred from the large balances to
their credit with me that no mere panic could shake his credit;
but, early on the morning of october th, my cousin, james m. hoyt,
came to me in bed, and read me a paragraph in the morning paper, to
the effect that james h. lucas & co., of st. louis, had
suspended. i was, of course, surprised, but not sorry; for i had
always contended that a man of so much visible wealth as mr. lucas
should not be engaged in a business subject to such vicissitudes. i
hurried down to the office, where i received the same information
officially, by telegraph, with instructions to make proper
disposition of the affairs of the bank, and to come out to st.
louis, with such assets as would be available there. i transferred
the funds belonging to all our correspondents, with lists of
outstanding checks, to one or other of our bankers, and with the
cash balance of the st. louis house and their available assets
started for st. louis. i may say with confidence that no man lost a
cent by either of the banking firms of lucas, turner & co., of
san francisco or new york; but, as usual, those who owed us were
not always as just. i reached st. louis october th, and found the
partners engaged in liquidating the balances due depositors as fast
as collections could be forced; and, as the panic began to subside,
this process became quite rapid, and mr. lucas, by making a loan in
philadelphia, was enabled to close out all accounts without having
made any serious sacrifices, of course, no person ever lost a cent
by him: he has recently died, leaving an estate of eight million
dollars. during his lifetime, i had opportunities to know him well,
and take much pleasure in bearing testimony to his great worth and
personal kindness. on the failure of his bank, he assumed
personally all the liabilities, released his partners of all
responsibility, and offered to assist me to engage in business,
which he supposed was due to me because i had resigned my army
commission. i remained in st. louis till the th of december,
, assisting in collecting for the bank, and in controlling all
matters which came from the new york and san francisco branches. b.
r. nisbet was still in san francisco, but had married a miss
thornton, and was coming home. there still remained in california a
good deal of real estate, and notes, valued at about two hundred
thousand dollars in the aggregate; so that, at mr. lucas's request,
i agreed to go out again, to bring matters, if possible, nearer a
final settlement. i accordingly left st. louis, reached lancaster,
where my family was, on the th, staid there till after christmas,
and then went to new york, where i remained till january th, when
i embarked on the steamer moles taylor (captain mcgowan) for
aspinwall; caught the golden gate (captain whiting) at panama,
january , ; and reached san francisco on the th of january.
i found that nisbet and wife had gone to st. louis, and that we had
passed each other at sea. he had carried the ledger and books to
st. louis, but left a schedule, notes, etc., in the hands of s. m.
bowman, esq., who passed them over to me.
on the th of january i published a notice of the dissolution
of the partnership, and called on all who were still indebted to
the firm of lucas, turner & co. to pay up, or the notes would
be sold at auction. i also advertised that all the real property,
was for sale.
business had somewhat changed since . parrott & co.;
garrison, fritz & ralston; wells, fargo & co.; drexel,
sather & church, and tallant & wilde, were the principal
bankers. property continued almost unsalable, and prices were less
than a half of what they had been in -'. william blending,
esq., had rented my house on harrison street; so i occupied a room
in the bank, no. , and boarded at the meiggs house, corner of
broadway and montgomery, which we owned. having reduced expenses to
a minimum, i proceeded, with all possible dispatch, to collect
outstanding debts, in some instances making sacrifices and
compromises. i made some few sales, and generally aimed to put
matters in such a shape that time would bring the best result. some
of our heaviest creditors were john m. rhodes & co., of
sacramento and shasta; langton & co., of downieville; and e. m.
stranger of murphy's. in trying to put these debts in course of
settlement, i made some arrangement in downieville with the
law-firm of spears & thornton, to collect, by suit, a certain
note of green & purdy for twelve thousand dollars. early in
april, i learned that spears had collected three thousand seven
hundred dollars in money, had appropriated it to his own use, and
had pledged another good note taken in part payment of three
thousand and fifty-three dollars. he pretended to be insane. i had
to make two visits to downieville on this business, and there, made
the acquaintance of mr. stewart, now a senator from nevada. he was
married to a daughter of governor foote; was living in a small
frame house on the bar just below the town; and his little daughter
was playing about the door in the sand. stewart was then a lawyer
in downieville, in good practice; afterward, by some lucky stroke,
became part owner of a valuable silver-mine in nevada, and is now
accounted a millionaire. i managed to save something out of spears,
and more out of his partner thornton. this affair of spears ruined
him, because his insanity was manifestly feigned.
i remained in san francisco till july d, when, having collected
and remitted every cent that i could raise, and got all the
property in the best shape possible, hearing from st. louis that
business had revived, and that there was no need of further
sacrifice; i put all the papers, with a full letter of
instructions, and power of attorney, in the hands of william
blending, esq., and took passage on the good steamer golden gate,
captain whiting, for panama and home. i reached lancaster on july
, , and found all the family well. i was then perfectly
unhampered, but the serious and greater question remained, what was
i to do to support my family, consisting of a wife and four
children, all accustomed to more than the average comforts of
life?
i remained at lancaster all of august, , during which time i
was discussing with mr. ewing and others what to do next. major
turner and mr. lucas, in st. louis, were willing to do any thing to
aid me, but i thought best to keep independent. mr. ewing had
property at chauncey, consisting of salt-wells and coal-mines, but
for that part of ohio i had no fancy. two of his sons, hugh and t.
e., jr., had established themselves at leavenworth, kansas, where
they and their father had bought a good deal of land, some near the
town, and some back in the country. mr. ewing offered to confide to
me the general management of his share of interest, and hugh and t.
e., jr., offered me an equal copartnership in their law-firm.
accordingly, about the st of september, i started for kansas,
stopping a couple of weeks in st. louis, and reached leavenworth. i
found about two miles below the fort, on the river-bank, where in
 was a tangled thicket, quite a handsome and thriving city,
growing rapidly in rivalry with kansas city, and st. joseph,
missouri. after looking about and consulting with friends, among
them my classmate major stewart van vliet, quartermaster at the
fort, i concluded to accept the proposition of mr. ewing, and
accordingly the firm of sherman & ewing was duly announced, and
our services to the public offered as attorneys-at-law. we had an
office on main street, between shawnee and delaware, on the second
floor, over the office of hampton denman, esq., mayor of the city.
this building was a mere shell, and our office was reached by a
stairway on the outside. although in the course of my military
reading i had studied a few of the ordinary law-books, such as
blackstone, kent, starkie, etc., i did not presume to be a lawyer;
but our agreement was that thomas ewing, jr., a good and thorough
lawyer, should manage all business in the courts, while i gave
attention to collections, agencies for houses and lands, and such
business as my experience in banking had qualified me for. yet, as
my name was embraced in a law-firm, it seemed to me proper to take
out a license. accordingly, one day when united states judge
lecompte was in our office, i mentioned the matter to him; he told
me to go down to the clerk of his court, and he would give me the
license. i inquired what examination i would have to submit to, and
he replied, "none at all;" he would admit me on the ground of
general intelligence.
during that summer we got our share of the business of the
profession, then represented by several eminent law-firms,
embracing names that have since flourished in the senate, and in
the higher courts of the country. but the most lucrative single
case was given me by my friend major van vliet, who employed me to
go to fort riley, one hundred and thirty-six miles west of fort
leavenworth, to superintend the repairs to the military road. for
this purpose he supplied me with a four-mule ambulance and driver.
the country was then sparsely settled, and quite as many indians
were along the road as white people; still there were embryo towns
all along the route, and a few farms sprinkled over the beautiful
prairies. on reaching indianola, near topeka, i found everybody
down with the chills and fever. my own driver became so shaky that
i had to act as driver and cook. but in due season i reconnoitred
the road, and made contracts for repairing some bridges, and for
cutting such parts of the road as needed it. i then returned to
fort leavenworth, and reported, receiving a fair compensation. on
my way up i met colonel sumner's column, returning from their
summer scout on the plains, and spent the night with the officers,
among whom were captains sackett, sturgis, etc. also at fort riley
i was cordially received and entertained by some old army-friends,
among them major sedgwick, captains totted, eli long, etc.
mrs. sherman and children arrived out in november, and we spent
the winter very comfortably in the house of thomas ewing, jr., on
the corner of third and pottawottamie streets. on the st of
january, , daniel mccook, esq., was admitted to membership in
our firm, which became sherman, ewing & mccook. our business
continued to grow, but, as the income hardly sufficed for three
such expensive personages, i continued to look about for something
more certain and profitable, and during that spring undertook for
the hon. thomas ewing, of ohio, to open a farm on a large tract of
land he owned on indian creek, forty miles west of leavenworth, for
the benefit of his grand-nephew, henry clark, and his grand-niece,
mrs. walker. these arrived out in the spring, by which time i had
caused to be erected a small frame dwelling-house, a barn, and
fencing for a hundred acres. this helped to pass away time, but
afforded little profit; and on the th of june, , i wrote to
major d. c. buel, assistant adjutant-general, on duty in the war
department with secretary of war floyd, inquiring if there was a
vacancy among the army paymasters, or any thing in his line that i
could obtain. he replied promptly, and sent me the printed
programme for a military college about to be organized in
louisiana, and advised me to apply for the superintendent's place,
saying that general g. mason graham, the half-brother of my old
commanding-general, r. b. mason, was very influential in this
matter, and would doubtless befriend me on account of the relations
that had existed between general mason and myself in california.
accordingly, i addressed a letter of application to the hon. r. c.
wickliffe, baton rouge, louisiana, asking the answer to be sent to
me at lancaster, ohio, where i proposed to leave my family. but,
before leaving this branch of the subject, i must explain a little
matter of which i have seen an account in print, complimentary or
otherwise of the firm of sherman, ewing & mccook, more
especially of the senior partner.
one day, as i sat in our office, an irishman came in and said he
had a case and wanted a lawyer. i asked him to sit down and give me
the points of his case, all the other members of the firm being
out. our client stated that he had rented a lot of an irish
landlord for five dollars a month; that he had erected thereon a
small frame shanty, which was occupied by his family; that he had,
paid his rent regularly up to a recent period, but to his house he
had appended a shed which extended over a part of an adjoining
vacant lot belonging to the same landlord, for which he was charged
two and a half dollars a month, which he refused to pay. the
consequence was, that his landlord had for a few months declined
even his five dollars monthly rent until the arrears amounted to
about seventeen dollars, for which he was sued. i told him we would
undertake his case, of which i took notes, and a fee of five
dollars in advance, and in due order i placed the notes in the
hands of mccook, and thought no more of it.
a month or so after, our client rushed into the office and said
his case had been called at judge gardner's (i think), and he
wanted his lawyer right away. i sent him up to the circuit court,
judge pettit's, for mccook, but he soon returned, saying he could
not find mccook, and accordingly i hurried with him up to judge
gardner's office, intending to ask a continuance, but i found our
antagonist there, with his lawyer and witnesses, and judge gardner
would not grant a continuance, so of necessity i had to act, hoping
that at every minute mccook would come. but the trial proceeded
regularly to its end; we were beaten, and judgment was entered
against our client for the amount claimed, and costs. as soon as
the matter was explained to mccook, he said "execution" could not
be taken for ten days, and, as our client was poor, and had nothing
on which the landlord could levy but his house, mccook advised him
to get his neighbors together, to pick up the house, and carry it
on to another vacant lot, belonging to a non-resident, so that even
the house could not be taken in execution. thus the grasping
landlord, though successful in his judgment, failed in the
execution, and our client was abundantly satisfied.
in due time i closed up my business at leavenworth, and went to
lancaster, ohio, where, in july, , i received notice from
governor wickliffe that i had been elected superintendent of the
proposed college, and inviting me to come down to louisiana as
early as possible, because they were anxious to put the college
into operation by the st of january following. for this honorable
position i was indebted to major d. c. buell and general g. mason
graham, to whom i have made full and due acknowledgment. during the
civil war, it was reported and charged that i owed my position to
the personal friendship of generals bragg and beauregard, and that,
in taking up arms against the south, i had been guilty of a breach
of hospitality and friendship. i was not indebted to general bragg,
because he himself told me that he was not even aware that i was an
applicant, and had favored the selection of major jenkins, another
west point graduate. general beauregard had nothing whatever to do
with the matter. .
in the autumn of , having made arrangements for my family to
remain in lancaster, i proceeded, via columbus, cincinnati, and
louisville, to baton rouge, louisiana, where i reported for duty to
governor wickliffe, who, by virtue of his office, was the president
of the board of supervisors of the new institution over which i was
called to preside. he explained to me the act of the legislature
under which the institution was founded; told me that the building
was situated near alexandria, in the parish of rapides, and was
substantially finished; that the future management would rest with
a board of supervisors, mostly citizens of rapides parish, where
also resided the governor-elect, t. o. moore, who would soon
succeed him in his office as governor and president ex officio; and
advised me to go at once to alexandria, and put myself in
communication with moore and the supervisors. accordingly i took a
boat at baton rouge, for the mouth of red river.
the river being low, and its navigation precarious, i there took
the regular mail-coach, as the more certain conveyance, and
continued on toward alexandria. i found, as a fellow-passenger in
the coach, judge henry boyce, of the united states district court,
with whom i had made acquaintance years before, at st. louis, and,
as we neared alexandria, he proposed that we should stop at
governor moore's and spend the night. moore's house and plantation
were on bayou robert, about eight miles from alexandria. we found
him at home, with his wife and a married daughter, and spent the
night there. he sent us forward to alexandria the next morning, in
his own carriage. on arriving at alexandria, i put up at an inn, or
boarding-house, and almost immediately thereafter went about ten
miles farther up bayou rapides, to the plantation and house of
general g. mason graham, to whom i looked as the principal man with
whom i had to deal. he was a high-toned gentleman, and his whole
heart was in the enterprise. he at once put me at ease. we acted
together most cordially from that time forth, and it was at his
house that all the details of the seminary were arranged. we first
visited the college-building together. it was located on an old
country place of four hundred acres of pineland, with numerous
springs, and the building was very large and handsome. a carpenter,
named james, resided there, and had the general charge of the
property; but, as there was not a table, chair, black-board, or any
thing on hand, necessary for a beginning, i concluded to quarter
myself in one of the rooms of the seminary, and board with an old
black woman who cooked for james, so that i might personally push
forward the necessary preparations. there was an old rail-fence
about the place, and a large pile of boards in front. i immediately
engaged four carpenters, and set them at work to make out of these
boards mess-tables, benches, black-boards, etc. i also opened a
correspondence with the professors-elect, and with all parties of
influence in the state, who were interested in our work: at the
meeting of the board of supervisors, held at alexandria, august ,
, five professors had been elected: . w. t. sherman,
superintendent, and professor of engineering, etc.; . anthony
vallas, professor of mathematics, philosophy, etc.; . francis w.
smith, professor of chemistry, etc.; . david f. boyd, professor of
languages, english and ancient; . e. berti st. ange, professor of
french and modern languages.
these constituted the academic board, while the general
supervision remained in the board of supervisors, composed of the
governor of the state, the superintendent of public education, and
twelve members, nominated by the governor, and confirmed by the
senate. the institution was bound to educate sixteen beneficiary
students, free of any charge for tuition. these had only to pay for
their clothing and books, while all others had to pay their entire
expenses, including tuition.
early in november, profs. smith, yallas, st. ange, and i, met a
committee of the board of supervisors, composed of t. c. manning,
g. mason graham, and w. w. whittington, at general graham's house,
and resolved to open the institution to pupils on the st day of
january, . we adopted a series of bylaws for the government of
the institution, which was styled the "louisiana seminary of
learning and military academy." this title grew out of the original
grant, by the congress of the united states, of a certain township
of public land, to be sold by the state, and dedicated to the use
of a "seminary of learning." i do not suppose that congress
designed thereby to fix the name or title; but the subject had so
long been debated in louisiana that the name, though awkward, had
become familiar. we appended to it "military academy," as
explanatory of its general design.
on the th of november, , the governor of the state,
wickliffe, issued officially a general circular, prepared by us,
giving public notice that the "seminary of learning" would open on
the st day of january, ; containing a description of the
locality, and the general regulations for the proposed institution;
and authorizing parties to apply for further information to the
"superintendent," at alexandria, louisiana.
the legislature had appropriated for the sixteen beneficiaries
at the rate of two hundred and eighty-three dollars per annum, to
which we added sixty dollars as tuition for pay cadets; and, though
the price was low, we undertook to manage for the first year on
that basis.
promptly to the day, we opened, with about sixty cadets present.
major smith was the commandant of cadets, and i the superintendent.
i had been to new orleans, where i had bought a supply of
mattresses, books, and every thing requisite, and we started very
much on the basis of west point and of the virginia military
institute, but without uniforms or muskets; yet with roll-calls,
sections, and recitations, we kept as near the standard of west
point as possible. i kept all the money accounts, and gave general
directions to the steward, professors, and cadets. the other
professors had their regular classes and recitations. we all lived
in rooms in the college building, except vallas, who had a family,
and rented a house near by. a creole gentleman, b. jarrean, esq.,
had been elected steward, and he also had his family in a house not
far off. the other professors had a mess in a room adjoining the
mess-hall. a few more cadets joined in the course of the winter, so
that we had in all, during the first term, seventy-three cadets, of
whom fifty-nine passed the examination on the th of july, .
during our first term many defects in the original act of the
legislature were demonstrated, and, by the advice of the board of
supervisors, i went down to baton rouge during the session of the
legislature, to advocate and urge the passage of a new bill,
putting the institution on a better footing. thomas o. moors was
then governor, bragg was a member of the board of public works, and
richard taylor was a senator. i got well acquainted with all of
these, and with some of the leading men of the state, and was
always treated with the greatest courtesy and kindness. in
conjunction with the proper committee of the legislature, we
prepared a new bill, which was passed and approved on the th of
march, , by which we were to have a beneficiary cadet for each
parish, in all fifty-six, and fifteen thousand dollars annually for
their maintenance; also twenty thousand dollars for the general use
of the college. during that session we got an appropriation of
fifteen thousand dollars for building two professors' houses, for
the purchase of philosophical and chemical apparatus, and for the
beginning of a college library. the seminary was made a state
arsenal, under the title of state central arsenal, and i was
allowed five hundred dollars a year as its superintendent. these
matters took me several times to baton rouge that winter, and i
recall an event of some interest, which most have happened in
february. at that time my brother, john sherman, was a candidate,
in the national house of representatives, for speaker, against
bocock, of virginia. in the south he was regarded as an
"abolitionist," the most horrible of all monsters; and many people
of louisiana looked at me with suspicion, as the brother of the
abolitionist, john sherman, and doubted the propriety of having me
at the head of an important state institution. by this time i was
pretty well acquainted with many of their prominent men, was
generally esteemed by all in authority, and by the people of
rapides parish especially, who saw that i was devoted to my
particular business, and that i gave no heed to the political
excitement of the day. but the members of the state senate and
house did not know me so well, and it was natural that they should
be suspicions of a northern man, and the brother of him who was the
"abolition" candidate for speaker of the house.
one evening, at a large dinner-party at governor moore's, at
which were present several members of the louisiana legislature,
taylor, bragg, and the attorney-general hyams, after the ladies had
left the table, i noticed at governor moore's end quite a lively
discussion going on, in which my name was frequently used; at
length the governor called to me, saying: "colonel sherman, you can
readily understand that, with your brother the abolitionist
candidate for speaker, some of our people wonder that you should be
here at the head of an important state institution. now, you are at
my table, and i assure you of my confidence. won't you speak your
mind freely on this question of slavery, that so agitates the land?
you are under my roof, and, whatever you say, you have my
protection."
i answered: "governor moors, you mistake in calling my brother,
john sherman, an abolitionist. we have been separated since
childhood—i in the army, and he pursuing his profession of
law in northern ohio; and it is possible we may differ in general
sentiment, but i deny that he is considered at home an
abolitionist; and, although he prefers the free institutions under
which he lives to those of slavery which prevail here, he would not
of himself take from you by law or force any property whatever,
even slaves."
then said moore: "give us your own views of slavery as you see
it here and throughout the south."
i answered in effect that "the people of louisiana were hardly
responsible for slavery, as they had inherited it; that i found two
distinct conditions of slavery, domestic and field hands. the
domestic slaves, employed by the families, were probably better
treated than any slaves on earth; but the condition of the
field-hands was different, depending more on the temper and
disposition of their masters and overseers than were those employed
about the house;" and i went on to say that, "were i a citizen of
louisiana, and a member of the legislature, i would deem it wise to
bring the legal condition of the slaves more near the status of
human beings under all christian and civilized governments. in the
first place, i argued that, in sales of slaves made by the state, i
would forbid the separation of families, letting the father,
mother, and children, be sold together to one person, instead of
each to the highest bidder. and, again, i would advise the repeal
of the statute which enacted a severe penalty for even the owner to
teach his slave to read and write, because that actually qualified
property and took away a part of its value; illustrating the
assertion by the case of henry sampson, who had been the slave of
colonel chambers, of rapides parish, who had gone to california as
the servant of an officer of the army, and who was afterward
employed by me in the bank at san francisco. at first he could not
write or read, and i could only afford to pay him one hundred
dollars a month; but he was taught to read and write by reilley,
our bank-teller, when his services became worth two hundred and
fifty dollars a month, which enabled him to buy his own freedom and
that of his brother and his family."
what i said was listened to by all with the most profound
attention; and, when i was through, some one (i think it was mr.
hyams) struck the table with his fist, making the glasses jingle,
and said, "by god, he is right!" and at once he took up the debate,
which went on, for an hour or more, on both sides with ability and
fairness. of course, i was glad to be thus relieved, because at the
time all men in louisiana were dreadfully excited on questions
affecting their slaves, who constituted the bulk of their wealth,
and without whom they honestly believed that sugar, cotton, and
rice, could not possibly be cultivated.
on the th and st of july, , we had an examination at the
seminary, winding up with a ball, and as much publicity as possible
to attract general notice; and immediately thereafter we all
scattered—the cadets to their homes, and the professors
wherever they pleased—all to meet again on the st day of the
next november. major smith and i agreed to meet in new york on a
certain day in august, to purchase books, models, etc. i went
directly to my family in lancaster, and after a few days proceeded
to washington, to endeavor to procure from the general government
the necessary muskets and equipments for our cadets by the
beginning of the next term. i was in washington on the th day of
august, and hunted up my friend major buell, of the
adjutant-general's department, who was on duty with the secretary
of war, floyd. i had with me a letter of governor moore's,
authorizing me to act in his name. major buell took me into floyd's
room at the war department, to whom i explained my business, and i
was agreeably surprised to meet with such easy success. although
the state of louisiana had already drawn her full quota of arms,
floyd promptly promised to order my requisition to be filled, and i
procured the necessary blanks at the ordnance-office, filled them
with two hundred cadet muskets, and all equipments complete, and
was assured that all these articles would be shipped to louisiana
in season for our use that fall. these assurances were faithfully
carried out.
i then went on to new york, there met major smith according to
appointment, and together we selected and purchased a good supply
of uniforms, clothing, and text books, as well as a fair number of
books of history and fiction, to commence a library.
when this business was completed, i returned to lancaster, and
remained with my family till the time approached for me to return
to louisiana. i again left my family at lancaster, until assured of
the completion of the two buildings designed for the married
professors for which i had contracted that spring with mr. mills,
of alexandria, and which were well under progress when i left in
august. one of these was designed for me and the other for vallas.
mr. ewing presented me with a horse, which i took down the river
with me, and en route i ordered from grimsley & co. a full
equipment of saddle, bridle, etc., the same that i used in the war,
and which i lost with my horse, shot under me at shiloh.
reaching alexandria early in october, i pushed forward the
construction of the two buildings, some fences, gates, and all
other work, with the object of a more perfect start at the opening
of the regular term november , .
about this time dr. powhatan clark was elected assistant
professor of chemistry, etc., and acted as secretary of the board
of supervisors, but no other changes were made in our small circle
of professors.
november came, and with it nearly if not quite all our first set
of cadets, and others, to the number of about one hundred and
thirty. we divided them into two companies, issued arms and
clothing, and began a regular system of drills and instruction, as
well as the regular recitations. i had moved into my new house, but
prudently had not sent for my family, nominally on the ground of
waiting until the season was further advanced, but really because
of the storm that was lowering heavy on the political horizon. the
presidential election was to occur in november, and the nominations
had already been made in stormy debates by the usual conventions.
lincoln and hamlin (to the south utterly unknown) were the nominees
of the republican party, and for the first time both these
candidates were from northern states. the democratic party
divided—one set nominating a ticket at charleston, and the
other at baltimore. breckenridge and lane were the nominees of the
southern or democratic party; and bell and everett, a kind of
compromise, mostly in favor in louisiana. political excitement was
at its very height, and it was constantly asserted that mr.
lincoln's election would imperil the union. i purposely kept aloof
from politics, would take no part, and remember that on the day of
the election in november i was notified that it would be advisable
for me to vote for bell and everett, but i openly said i would not,
and i did not. the election of mr. lincoln fell upon us all like a
clap of thunder. people saw and felt that the south had threatened
so long that, if she quietly submitted, the question of slavery in
the territories was at an end forever. i mingled freely with the
members of the board of supervisors, and with the people of rapides
parish generally, keeping aloof from all cliques and parties, and i
certainly hoped that the threatened storm would blow over, as had
so often occurred before, after similar threats. at our seminary
the order of exercises went along with the regularity of the
seasons. once a week, i had the older cadets to practise reading,
reciting, and elocution, and noticed that their selections were
from calhoun, yancey, and other southern speakers, all treating of
the defense of their slaves and their home institutions as the very
highest duty of the patriot. among boys this was to be expected;
and among the members of our board, though most of them declaimed
against politicians generally, and especially abolitionists, as
pests, yet there was a growing feeling that danger was in the wind.
i recall the visit of a young gentleman who had been sent from
jackson, by the governor of mississippi, to confer with governor
moore, then on his plantation at bayou robert, and who had come
over to see our college. he spoke to me openly of secession as a
fixed fact, and that its details were only left open for
discussion. i also recall the visit of some man who was said to be
a high officer in the order of "knights of the golden circle," of
the existence of which order i was even ignorant, until explained
to me by major smith and dr. clark. but in november, , no man
ever approached me offensively, to ascertain my views, or my
proposed course of action in case of secession, and no man in or
out of authority ever tried to induce me to take part in steps
designed to lead toward disunion. i think my general opinions were
well known and understood, viz., that "secession was treason, was
war;" and that in no event would the north and west permit the
mississippi river to pass out of their control. but some men at the
south actually supposed at the time that the northwestern states,
in case of a disruption of the general government, would be drawn
in self-interest to an alliance with the south. what i now write i
do not offer as any thing like a history of the important events of
that time, but rather as my memory of them, the effect they had on
me personally, and to what extent they influenced my personal
conduct.
south carolina seceded december , , and mississippi soon
after. emissaries came to louisiana to influence the governor,
legislature, and people, and it was the common assertion that, if
all the cotton states would follow the lead of south carolina, it
would diminish the chances of civil war, because a bold and
determined front would deter the general government from any
measures of coercion. about this time also, viz., early in
december, we received mr. buchanan's annual message to congress, in
which he publicly announced that the general government had no
constitutional power to "coerce a state." i confess this staggered
me, and i feared that the prophecies and assertions of alison and
other european commentators on our form of government were right,
and that our constitution was a mere rope of sand, that would break
with the first pressure.
the legislature of louisiana met on the th of december, and
passed an act calling a convention of delegates from the people, to
meet at baton rouge, on the th of january, to take into
consideration the state of the union; and, although it was
universally admitted that a large majority of the voters of the
state were opposed to secession, disunion, and all the steps of the
south carolinians, yet we saw that they were powerless, and that
the politicians would sweep them along rapidly to the end,
prearranged by their leaders in washington. before the ordinance of
secession was passed, or the convention had assembled, on the faith
of a telegraphic dispatch sent by the two senators, benjamin and
slidell, from their seats in the united states senate at
washington, governor moore ordered the seizure of all the united
states forts at the mouth of the mississippi and lake
pontchartrain, and of the united states arsenal at baton rouge. the
forts had no garrisons, but the arsenal was held by a small company
of artillery, commanded by major haskins, a most worthy and
excellent officer, who had lost an arm in mexico. i remember well
that i was strongly and bitterly impressed by the seizure of the
arsenal, which occurred on january , .
when i went first to baton rouge, in , en route to
alexandria, i found captain rickett's company of artillery
stationed in the arsenal, but soon after there was somewhat of a
clamor on the texas frontier about brownsville, which induced the
war department to order rickett's company to that frontier. i
remember that governor moore remonstrated with the secretary of war
because so much dangerous property, composed of muskets, powder,
etc., had been left by the united states unguarded, in a parish
where the slave population was as five or six to one of whites; and
it was on his official demand that the united states government
ordered haskinss company to replace rickett's. this company did not
number forty men. in the night of january th, about five hundred
new orleans militia, under command of a colonel wheat, went up from
new orleans by boat, landed, surrounded the arsenal, and demanded
its surrender. haskins was of course unprepared for such a step,
yet he at first resolved to defend the post as he best could with
his small force. but bragg, who was an old army acquaintance of
his, had a parley with him, exhibited to him the vastly superior
force of his assailants, embracing two field-batteries, and offered
to procure for him honorable terms, to march out with drums and
colors, and to take unmolested passage in a boat up to st. louis;
alleging, further, that the old union was at an end, and that a
just settlement would be made between the two new fragments for all
the property stored in the arsenal. of course it was haskins's duty
to have defended his post to the death; but up to that time the
national authorities in washington had shown such pusillanimity,
that the officers of the army knew not what to do. the result,
anyhow, was that haskins surrendered his post, and at once embarked
for st. louis. the arms and munitions stored in the arsenal were
scattered—some to mississippi, some to new orleans, some to
shreveport; and to me, at the central arsenal, were consigned two
thousand muskets, three hundred jager rifles, and a large amount of
cartridges and ammunition. the invoices were signed by the former
ordnance-sergeant, olodowski, as a captain of ordnance, and i think
he continued such on general bragg's staff through the whole of the
subsequent civil war. these arms, etc., came up to me at
alexandria, with orders from governor moore to receipt for and
account for them. thus i was made the receiver of stolen goods, and
these goods the property of the united states. this grated hard on
my feelings as an ex-army-officer, and on counting the arms i
noticed that they were packed in the old familiar boxes, with the
"u. s." simply scratched off. general g. mason graham had resigned
as the chairman of the executive committee, and dr. s. a. smith, of
alexandria, then a member of the state senate, had succeeded him as
chairman, and acted as head of the board of supervisors. at the
time i was in most intimate correspondence with all of these
parties, and our letters must have been full of politics, but i
have only retained copies of a few of the letters, which i will
embody in this connection, as they will show, better than by any
thing i can now recall, the feelings of parties at that critical
period. the seizure of the arsenal at baton rouge occurred january
, , and the secession ordinance was not passed until about
the th or th of the same month. at all events, after the
seizure of the arsenal, and before the passage of the ordinance of
secession, viz., on the th of january, i wrote as follows:
louisiana state seminary of learning and military academy
january , 
governor thomas o. moore, baton, rouge, louisiana.
sir: as i occupy a quasi-military position under the laws of the
state, i deem it proper to acquaint you that i accepted such
position when louisiana was a state in the union, and when the
motto of this seminary was inserted in marble over the main door:
"by the liberality of the general government of the united states.
the union—esto perpetua."
recent events foreshadow a great change, and it becomes all men to
choose. if louisiana withdraw from the federal union, i prefer to
maintain my allegiance to the constitution as long as a fragment of
it survives; and my longer stay here would be wrong in every sense
of the word.
in that event, i beg you will send or appoint some authorized agent
to take charge of the arms and munitions of war belonging to the
state, or advise me what disposition to make of them.
and furthermore, as president of the board of supervisors, i beg
you to take immediate steps to relieve me as superintendent, the
moment the state determines to secede, for on no earthly account
will i do any act or think any thought hostile to or in defiance of
the old government of the united states.
with great respect, your obedient servant,
w. t. sherman, superintendent.
january , .
to governor moore:
my dear sir: i take it for granted that you have been expecting for
some days the accompanying paper from me (the above official
letter). i have repeatedly and again made known to general graham
and dr. smith that, in the event of a severance of the relations
hitherto existing between the confederated states of this union, i
would be forced to choose the old union. it is barely possible all
the states may secede, south and north, that new combinations may
result, but this process will be one of time and uncertainty, and i
cannot with my opinions await the subsequent development.
i have never been a politician, and therefore undervalue the
excited feelings and opinions of present rulers, but i do think, if
this people cannot execute a form of government like the present,
that a worse one will result.
i will keep the cadets as quiet as possible. they are nervous, but
i think the interest of the state requires them here, guarding this
property, and acquiring a knowledge which will be useful to your
state in after-times.
when i leave, which i now regard as certain, the present professors
can manage well enough, to afford you leisure time to find a
suitable successor to me. you might order major smith to receipt
for the arms, and to exercise military command, while the academic
exercises could go on under the board. in time, some gentleman will
turn up, better qualified than i am, to carry on the seminary to
its ultimate point of success. i entertain the kindest feelings
toward all, and would leave the state with much regret; only in
great events we must choose, one way or the other.
truly, your friend,
january , —saturday.
dr. s. a. smith, president board of supervisors, baton rouge,
louisiana.
dear sir: i have just finished my quarterly reports to the parents
of all the cadets here, or who have been here. all my books of
account are written up to date. all bills for the houses, fences,
etc., are settled, and nothing now remains but the daily tontine of
recitations and drills. i have written officially and unofficially
to governor moore, that with my opinions of the claimed right of
accession, of the seizure of public forts, arsenals, etc., and the
ignominious capture of a united states garrison, stationed in your
midst, as a guard to the arsenal and for the protection of your own
people, it would be highly improper for me longer to remain. no
great inconvenience can result to the seminary. i will be the chief
loser. i came down two months before my pay commenced. i made
sacrifices in kansas to enable me thus to obey the call of governor
wickliffe, and you know that last winter i declined a most
advantageous offer of employment abroad; and thus far i have
received nothing as superintendent of the arsenal, though i went to
washington and new york (at my own expense) on the faith of the
five hundred dollars salary promised.
these are all small matters in comparison with those involved in
the present state of the country, which will cause sacrifices by
millions, instead of by hundreds. the more i think of it, the more
i think i should be away, the sooner the better; and therefore i
hope you will join with governor moors in authorizing me to turn
over to major smith the military command here, and to the academic
board the control of the daily exercises and recitations.
there will be no necessity of your coming up. you can let major
smith receive the few hundreds of cash i have on hand, and i can
meet you on a day certain in new orleans, when we can settle the
bank account. before i leave, i can pay the steward jarrean his
account for the month, and there would be no necessity for other
payments till about the close of march, by which time the board can
meet, and elect a treasurer and superintendent also.
at present i have no class, and there will be none ready till about
the month of may, when there will be a class in "surveying." even
if you do not elect a superintendent in the mean time, major smith
could easily teach this class, as he is very familiar with the
subject-matter: indeed, i think you will do well to leave the
subject of a new superintendent until one perfectly satisfactory
turns up.
there is only one favor i would ask. the seminary has plenty of
money in bank. the legislature will surely appropriate for my
salary as superintendent of this arsenal. would you not let me make
my drafts on the state treasury, send them to you, let the
treasurer note them for payment when the appropriation is made, and
then pay them out of the seminary fund? the drafts will be paid in
march, and the seminary will lose nothing. this would be just to
me; for i actually spent two hundred dollars and more in going to
washington and new york, thereby securing from the united states,
in advance, three thousand dollars' worth of the very best arms;
and clothing and books, at a clear profit to the seminary of over
eight hundred dollars. i may be some time in finding new
employment, and will stand in need of this money (five hundred
dollars); otherwise i would abandon it.
i will not ask you to put the board of supervisors to the trouble
of meeting, unless you can get a quorum at baton rouge.
with great respect, your friend,
by course of mail, i received the following answer from governor
moore, the original of which i still possess. it is all in general
braggs handwriting, with which i am familiar.
executive office,
baton rouge, louisiana, january , 
my dear sir: it is with the deepest regret i acknowledge receipt of
your communication of the th inst. in the pressure of official
business, i can now only request you to transfer to prof. smith the
arms, munitions, and funds in your hands, whenever you conclude to
withdraw from the position you have filled with so much
distinction. you cannot regret more than i do the necessity which
deprives us of your services, and you will bear with you the
respect, confidence, and admiration, of all who have been
associated with you. very truly, your friend,
thomas o. moore.
colonel w. t. sherman, superintendent military academy,
alexandria.
i must have received several letters from bragg, about this
time, which have not been preserved; for i find that, on the st of
february, , i wrote him thus:
seminary of learning alexandria, louisiana, february , .
colonel braxton bragg, baton, rouge, louisiana.
dear sir: yours of january d and th are received. i thank you
most kindly, and governor moors through you, for the kind manner in
which you have met my wishes.
now that i cannot be compromised by political events, i will so
shape my course as best to serve the institution, which has a
strong hold on my affections and respect.
the board of supervisors will be called for the th instant, and i
will cooperate with them in their measures to place matters here on
a safe and secure basis. i expect to be here two weeks, and will
make you full returns of money and property belonging to the state
central arsenal. all the arms and ammunition are safely stored
here. then i will write you more at length. with sincere respect,
your friend,
major smith's receipt to me, for the arms and property belonging
both to the seminary and to the arsenal, is dated february ,
. i subjoin also, in this connection, copies of one or two
papers that may prove of interest
baton rouge, january , .
to major sherman, superintendent, alexandria.
my dear sir: your letter was duly receive, and would have been
answered ere this time could i have arranged sooner the matter of
the five hundred dollars. i shall go from here to new orleans
to-day or tomorrow, and will remain there till saturday after next,
perhaps. i shall expect to meet you there, as indicated in your
note to me.
i need not tell you that it is with no ordinary regret that i view
your determination to leave us, for really i believe that the
success of our institution, now almost assured, is jeopardized
thereby. i am sore that we will never have a superintendent with
whom i shall have more pleasant relations than those which have
existed between yourself and me.
i fully appreciate the motives which have induced you to give up a
position presenting so many advantages to yourself, and sincerely
hope that you may, in any future enterprise, enjoy the success
which your character and ability merit and deserve.
should you come down on the rapides (steamer), please look after my
wife, who will, i hope, accompany you on said boat, or some other
good one.
colonel bragg informs me that the necessary orders have been given
for the transfer and receipt by major smith of the public
property.
i herewith transmit a request to the secretary to convene the board
of supervisors, that they may act as seems best to them in the
premises.
in the mean time, major smith will command by seniority the cadets,
and the academic board will be able to conduct the scientific
exercises of the institution until the board of supervisors can
have time to act. hoping to meet you soon at the st. charles, i
am,
most truly, your friend and servant, s. a. smith
p. s. governor moors desires me to express his profound regret that
the state is about to lose one who we all fondly hoped had cast his
destinies for weal or for woe among us; and that he is sensible
that we lose thereby an officer whom it will be difficult, if not
impossible, to replace.
baton rouge, february , .
to major sherman, alexandria.
dear sir: i have been in new orleans for ten days, and on returning
here find two letters from you, also your prompt answer to the
resolution of the house of representatives, for which i am much
obliged.
the resolution passed the last day before adjournment. i was
purposing to respond, when your welcome reports came to hand. i
have arranged to pay you your five hundred dollars.
i will say nothing of general politics, except to give my opinion
that there is not to be any war.
in that event, would it not be possible for you to become a citizen
of our state? everyone deplores your determination to leave us. at
the same time, your friends feel that you are abandoning a position
that might become an object of desire to any one.
i will try to meet you in new orleans at any time you may indicate;
but it would be best for you to stop here, when, if possible, i
will accompany you. should you do so, you will find me just above
the state-house, and facing it.
bring with you a few copies of the "rules of the seminary."
yours truly,
s. a. smith
colonel w. t. sherman.
sir: i am instructed by the board of supervisors of this
institution to present a copy of the resolutions adopted by them at
their last meeting.
"resolved, that the thanks of the board of supervisors are due, and
are hereby tendered, to colonel william t. sherman for the able and
efficient manner in which he has conducted the affairs of the
seminary during the time the institution has been under his
control—a period attended with unusual difficulties,
requiring on the part of the superintendent to successfully
overcome them a high order of administrative talent. and the board
further bear willing testimony to the valuable services that
colonel sherman has rendered them in their efforts to establish an
institution of learning in accordance with the beneficent design of
the state and federal governments; evincing at all times a
readiness to adapt himself to the ever-varying requirements of an
institution of learning in its infancy, struggling to attain a
position of honor and usefulness.
"resolved, further, that, in accepting the resignation of colonel
sherman as superintendent of the state seminary of learning and
military academy, we tender to him assurances of our high personal
regard, and our sincere regret at the occurrence of causes that
render it necessary to part with so esteemed and valued a friend,
as well as co-laborer in the cause of education."
powhatan clarke, secretary of the board.
a copy of the resolution of the academic board, passed at their
session of april ,:
"resolved, that in the resignation of the late superintendent,
colonel w. t. sherman, the academic board deem it not improper to
express their deep conviction of the loss the institution has
sustained in being thus deprived of an able head. they cannot fail
to appreciate the manliness of character which has always marked
the actions of colonel sherman. while he is personally endeared to
many of them as a friend, they consider it their high pleasure to
tender to him in this resolution their regret on his separation,
and their sincere wish for his future welfare."
i have given the above at some length, because, during the civil
war, it was in southern circles asserted that i was guilty of a
breach of hospitality in taking up arms against the south. they
were manifestly the aggressors, and we could only defend our own by
assailing them. yet, without any knowledge of what the future had
in store for me, i took unusual precautions that the institution
should not be damaged by my withdrawal. about the th of february,
having turned over all property, records, and money, on hand, to
major smith, and taking with me the necessary documents to make the
final settlement with dr. s. a. smith, at the bank in new orleans,
where the funds of the institution were deposited to my credit, i
took passage from alexandria for that city, and arrived there, i
think, on the d. dr. smith met me, and we went to the bank, where
i turned over to him the balance, got him to audit all my accounts,
certify that they were correct and just, and that there remained
not one cent of balance in my hands. i charged in my account
current for my salary up to the end of february, at the rate of
four thousand dollars a year, and for the five hundred dollars due
me as superintendent of the central arsenal, all of which was due
and had been fairly earned, and then i stood free and discharged of
any and every obligation, honorary or business, that was due by me
to the state of louisiana, or to any corporation or individual in
that state.
this business occupied two or three days, during which i staid
at the st. louis hotel. i usually sat at table with colonel and
mrs. bragg, and an officer who wore the uniform of the state of
louisiana, and was addressed as captain. bragg wore a colonel's
uniform, and explained to me that he was a colonel in the state
service, a colonel of artillery, and that some companies of his
regiment garrisoned forts jackson and st. philip, and the arsenal
at baton rouge.
beauregard at the time had two sons at the seminary of learning.
i had given them some of my personal care at the father's request,
and, wanting to tell him of their condition and progress, i went to
his usual office in the custom-house building, and found him in the
act of starting for montgomery, alabama. bragg said afterward that
beauregard had been sent for by jefferson davis, and that it was
rumored that he had been made a brigadier-general, of which fact he
seemed jealous, because in the old army bragg was the senior.
davis and stephens had been inaugurated president and
vice-president of the confederate states of america, february ,
, at montgomery, and those states only embraced the seven
cotton states. i recall a conversation at the tea-table, one
evening, at the st. louis hotel. when bragg was speaking of
beauregard's promotion, mrs. bragg, turning to me, said, "you know
that my husband is not a favorite with the new president." my mind
was resting on mr. lincoln as the new president, and i said i did
not know that bragg had ever met mr. lincoln, when mrs. bragg said,
quite pointedly, "i didn't mean your president, but our president."
i knew that bragg hated davis bitterly, and that he had resigned
from the army in , or , because davis, as secretary of war,
had ordered him, with his battery, from jefferson barracks,
missouri, to fort smith or fort washita, in the indian country, as
bragg expressed it, "to chase indians with six-pounders."
i visited the quartermaster, colonel a. c. myers, who had
resigned from the army, january , , and had accepted service
under the new regime. his office was in the same old room in the
lafayette square building, which he had in , when i was there a
commissary, with the same pictures on the wall, and the letters "u.
s." on every thing, including his desk, papers, etc. i asked him if
he did not feel funny. "no, not at all. the thing was inevitable,
secession was a complete success; there would be no war, but the
two governments would settle all matters of business in a friendly
spirit, and each would go on in its allotted sphere, without
further confusion." about this date, february th, general twiggs,
myers's father-in-law, had surrendered his entire command, in the
department of texas, to some state troops, with all the government
property, thus consummating the first serious step in the drama of
the conspiracy, which was to form a confederacy of the cotton
states, before working upon the other slave or border states, and
before the th of march, the day for the inauguration of president
lincoln.
i walked the streets of new orleans, and found business going
along as usual. ships were strung for miles along the lower levee,
and steamboats above, all discharging or receiving cargo. the
pelican flag of louisiana was flying over the custom house, mint,
city hall, and everywhere. at the levee ships carried every flag on
earth except that of the united states, and i was told that during
a procession on the d of february, celebrating their emancipation
from the despotism of the united states government, only one
national flag was shown from a house, and that the houses of
cuthbert bullitt, on lafayette square. he was commanded to take it
down, but he refused, and defended it with his pistol.
the only officer of the army that i can recall, as being there
at the time, who was faithful, was colonel c. l. kilburn, of the
commissary department, and he was preparing to escape north.
everybody regarded the change of government as final; that
louisiana, by a mere declaration, was a free and independent state,
and could enter into any new alliance or combination she chose.
men were being enlisted and armed, to defend the state, and
there was not the least evidence that the national administration
designed to make any effort, by force, to vindicate the national
authority. i therefore bade adieu to all my friends, and about the
th of february took my departure by railroad, for lancaster, via
cairo and cincinnati.
before leaving this subject, i will simply record the fate of
some of my associates. the seminary was dispersed by the war, and
all the professors and cadets took service in the confederacy,
except yallas, st. ange, and cadet taliaferro. the latter joined a
union regiment, as a lieutenant, after new orleans was retaken by
the united states fleet under farragut. i think that both yallas
and st. ange have died in poverty since the war. major smith joined
the rebel army in virginia, and was killed in april, , as he
was withdrawing his garrison, by night, from the batteries at
drury's bluff, at the time general lee began his final retreat from
richmond. boyd became a captain of engineers on the staff of
general richard taylor, was captured, and was in jail at natchez,
mississippi, when i was on my meridian expedition. he succeeded in
getting a letter to me on my arrival at vicksburg, and, on my way
down to new orleans, i stopped at natchez, took him along, and
enabled him to effect an exchange through general banks. as soon as
the war was over, he returned to alexandria, and reorganized the
old institution, where i visited him in ; but, the next winter,
the building took fire end burned to the ground. the students,
library, apparatus, etc., were transferred to baton rouge, where
the same institution now is, under the title of the louisiana
university. i have been able to do them many acts of kindness, and
am still in correspondence, with colonel boyd, its president.
general g. mason graham is still living on his plantation, on
bayou rapides, old and much respected.
dr. s. a. smith became a surgeon in the rebel army, and at the
close of the war was medical director of the trans-mississippi
department, with general kirby smith. i have seen him since the
war, at new orleans, where he died about a year ago.
dr. clark was in washington recently, applying for a place as
united states consul abroad. i assisted him, but with no success,
and he is now at baltimore, maryland.
after the battle of shiloh, i found among the prisoners cadet
barrow, fitted him out with some clean clothing, of which he was in
need, and from him learned that cadet workman was killed in that
battle.
governor moore's plantation was devastated by general banks's
troops. after the war he appealed to me, and through the
attorney-general, henry stanbery, i aided in having his land
restored to him, and i think he is now living there.
bragg, beauregard, and taylor, enacted high parts in the
succeeding war, and now reside in louisiana or texas.
during the time of these events in louisiana, i was in constant
correspondence with my brother, john sherman, at washington; mr.
ewing, at lancaster, ohio; and major h. s. turner, at st. louis. i
had managed to maintain my family comfortably at lancaster, but was
extremely anxious about the future. it looked like the end of my
career, for i did not suppose that "civil war" could give me an
employment that would provide for the family. i thought, and may
have said, that the national crisis had been brought about by the
politicians, and, as it was upon us, they "might fight it out"
therefore, when i turned north from new orleans, i felt more
disposed to look to st. louis for a home, and to major. turner to
find me employment, than to the public service.
i left new orleans about the st of march, , by rail to
jackson and clinton, mississippi, jackson, tennessee, and columbus,
kentucky, where we took a boat to cairo, and thence, by rail, to
cincinnati and lancaster. all the way, i heard, in the cars and
boats, warm discussions about polities; to the effect that, if mr.
lincoln should attempt coercion of the seceded states, the other
slave or border states would make common cause, when, it was
believed, it would be madness to attempt to reduce them to
subjection. in the south, the people were earnest, fierce and
angry, and were evidently organizing for action; whereas, in
illinois, indiana, and ohio, i saw not the least sign of
preparation. it certainly looked to me as though the people of the
north would tamely submit to a disruption of the union, and the
orators of the south used, openly and constantly, the expressions
that there would be no war, and that a lady's thimble would hold
all the blood to be shed. on reaching lancaster, i found letters
from my brother john, inviting me to come to washington, as he
wanted to see me; and from major tamer, at st. louis, that he was
trying to secure for me the office of president of the fifth street
railroad, with a salary of twenty-five hundred dollars; that mr.
lucas and d. a. january held a controlling interest of stock, would
vote for me, and the election would occur in march. this suited me
exactly, and i answered turner that i would accept, with thanks.
but i also thought it right and proper that i should first go to
washington, to talk with my brother, senator sherman.
mr. lincoln had just been installed, and the newspapers were
filled with rumors of every kind indicative of war; the chief act
of interest was that major robert anderson had taken by night into
fort sumter all the troops garrisoning charleston harbor, and that
he was determined to defend it against the demands of the state of
south carolina and of the confederate states. i must have reached
washington about the th of march. i found my brother there, just
appointed senator, in place of mr. chase, who was in the cabinet,
and i have no doubt my opinions, thoughts, and feelings, wrought up
by the events in louisiana; seemed to him gloomy and extravagant.
about washington i saw but few signs of preparation, though the
southern senators and representatives were daily sounding their
threats on the floors of congress, and were publicly withdrawing to
join the confederate congress at montgomery. even in the war
department and about the public offices there was open, unconcealed
talk, amounting to high-treason.
one day, john sherman took me with him to see mr. lincoln. he
walked into the room where the secretary to the president now sits,
we found the room full of people, and mr. lincoln sat at the end of
the table, talking with three or four gentlemen, who soon left.
john walked up, shook hands, and took a chair near him, holding in
his hand some papers referring to, minor appointments in the state
of ohio, which formed the subject of conversation. mr. lincoln took
the papers, said he would refer them to the proper heads of
departments, and would be glad to make the appointments asked for,
if not already promised. john then turned to me, and said, "mr.
president, this is my brother, colonel sherman, who is just up from
louisiana, he may give you some information you want." "ah!" said
mr. lincoln, "how are they getting along down there?" i said, "they
think they are getting along swimmingly—they are preparing
for war." "oh, well!" said he, "i guess we'll manage to keep
house." i was silenced, said no more to him, and we soon left. i
was sadly disappointed, and remember that i broke out on john,
d—ning the politicians generally, saying, "you have got
things in a hell of a fig, and you may get them out as you best
can," adding that the country was sleeping on a volcano that might
burst forth at any minute, but that i was going to st. louis to
take care of my family, and would have no more to do with it. john
begged me to be more patient, but i said i would not; that i had no
time to wait, that i was off for st. louis; and off i went. at
lancaster i found letters from major turner, inviting me to st.
louis, as the place in the fifth street railroad was a sure thing,
and that mr. lucas would rent me a good house on locust street,
suitable for my family, for six hundred dollars a year.
mrs. sherman and i gathered our family and effects together,
started for st. louis march th, where we rented of mr. lucas the
house on locust street, between tenth and eleventh, and occupied it
on the st of april. charles ewing and john hunter had formed a
law-partnership in st. louis, and agreed to board with us, taking
rooms on the third floor in the latter part of march, i was duly
elected president of the fifth street railroad, and entered on the
discharge of my duties april , . we had a central office on
the corner of fifth and locust, and also another up at the stables
in bremen. the road was well stocked and in full operation, and all
i had to do was to watch the economical administration of existing
affairs, which i endeavored to do with fidelity and zeal. but the
whole air was full of wars and rumors of wars. the struggle was
going on politically for the border states. even in missouri, which
was a slave state, it was manifest that the governor of the state,
claiborne jackson, and all the leading politicians, were for the
south in case of a war. the house on the northwest corner of fifth
and pine was the rebel headquarters, where the rebel flag was hung
publicly, and the crowds about the planters' house were all more or
less rebel. there was also a camp in lindell's grove, at the end of
olive, street, under command of general d. m. frost, a northern
man, a graduate of west point, in open sympathy with the southern
leaders. this camp was nominally a state camp of instruction, but,
beyond doubt, was in the interest of the southern cause, designed
to be used against the national authority in the event of the
general government's attempting to coerce the southern confederacy.
general william s. harvey was in command of the department of
missouri, and resided in his own house, on fourth street, below
market; and there were five or six companies of united states
troops in the arsenal, commanded by captain n. lyon; throughout the
city, there had been organized, almost exclusively out of the
german part of the population, four or five regiments of "home
guards," with which movement frank blair, b. gratz brown, john m.
schofield, clinton b. fisk, and others, were most active on the
part of the national authorities. frank blair's brother montgomery
was in the cabinet of mr. lincoln at washington, and to him seemed
committed the general management of affairs in missouri.
the newspapers fanned the public excitement to the highest
pitch, and threats of attacking the arsenal on the one hand, and
the mob of d—d rebels in camp jackson on the other, were
bandied about. i tried my best to keep out of the current, and only
talked freely with a few men; among them colonel john o'fallon, a
wealthy gentleman who resided above st. louis. he daily came down
to my office in bremen, and we walked up and down the pavement by
the hour, deploring the sad condition of our country, and the
seeming drift toward dissolution and anarchy. i used also to go
down to the arsenal occasionally to see lyon, totten, and other of
my army acquaintance, and was glad to see them making preparations
to defend their post, if not to assume the offensive.
the bombardment of fort sumter, which was announced by
telegraph, began april th, and ended on the th. we then knew
that the war was actually begun, and though the south was openly,
manifestly the aggressor, yet her friends and apologists insisted
that she was simply acting on a justifiable defensive, and that in
the forcible seizure of, the public forts within her limits the
people were acting with reasonable prudence and foresight. yet
neither party seemed willing to invade, or cross the border. davis,
who ordered the bombardment of sumter, knew the temper of his
people well, and foresaw that it would precipitate the action of
the border states; for almost immediately virginia, north carolina,
arkansas, and tennessee, followed the lead of the cotton states,
and conventions were deliberating in kentucky and missouri.
on the night of saturday, april th, i received the following,
dispatch:
washington, april ,.
major w. t. sherman:
will you accept the chief clerkship of the war department? we will
make you assistant secretary of war when congress meets.
m. blair, postmaster-general.
to which i replied by telegraph, monday morning; "i cannot
accept;" and by mail as follows:
monday, april , .
office of the st. louis railroad company.
hon. m. blair, washington, d. c.
i received, about nine o'clock saturday night, your telegraph
dispatch, which i have this moment answered, "i cannot
accept."
i have quite a large family, and when i resigned my place in
louisiana, on account of secession, i had no time to lose; and,
therefore, after my hasty visit to washington, where i saw no
chance of employment, i came to st. louis, have accepted a place in
this company, have rented a house, and incurred other obligations,
so that i am not at liberty to change.
i thank you for the compliment contained in your offer, and assure
you that i wish the administration all success in its almost
impossible task of governing this distracted and anarchical
people.
yours truly,
i was afterward told that this letter gave offense, and that
some of mr. lincoln's cabinet concluded that i too would prove
false to the country.
later in that month, after the capture of fort sumter by the
confederate authorities, a dr. cornyn came to our house on locust
street, one night after i had gone to bed, and told me he had been
sent by frank blair, who was not well, and wanted to see me that
night at his house. i dressed and walked over to his house on
washington avenue, near fourteenth, and found there, in the
front-room, several gentlemen, among whom i recall henry t. blow.
blair was in the back-room, closeted with some gentleman, who soon
left, and i was called in. he there told me that the government was
mistrustful of general harvey, that a change in the command of the
department was to be made; that he held it in his power to appoint
a brigadier-general, and put him in command of the department, and
he offered me the place. i told him i had once offered my services,
and they were declined; that i had made business engagements in st.
louis, which i could not throw off at pleasure; that i had long
deliberated on my course of action, and must decline his offer,
however tempting and complimentary. he reasoned with me, but i
persisted. he told me, in that event, he should appoint lyon, and
he did so.
finding that even my best friends were uneasy as to my political
status, on the th of may i addressed the following official letter
to the secretary of war:
office of the st. louis railroad company,
may ,.
hon. s. cameron, secretary of war, washington, d. c.
dear sir: i hold myself now, as always, prepared to serve my
country in the capacity for which i was trained. i did not and will
not volunteer for three months, because i cannot throw my family on
the cold charity of the world. but for the three-years call, made
by the president, an officer can prepare his command and do good
service.
i will not volunteer as a soldier, because rightfully or wrongfully
i feel unwilling to take a mere private's place, and, having for
many years lived in california and louisiana, the men are not well
enough acquainted with me to elect me to my appropriate
place.
should my services be needed, the records of the war department
will enable you to designate the station in which i can render most
service.
yours truly, w. t. sherman.
to this i do not think i received a direct answer; but, on the
th of the same month, i was appointed colonel of the thirteenth
regular infantry.
i remember going to the arsenal on the th of may, taking my
children with me in the street-cars. within the arsenal wall were
drawn up in parallel lines four regiments of the "home guards," and
i saw men distributing cartridges to the boxes. i also saw general
lyon running about with his hair in the wind, his pockets full of
papers, wild and irregular, but i knew him to be a man of vehement
purpose and of determined action. i saw of course that it meant
business, but whether for defense or offense i did not know. the
next morning i went up to the railroad-office in bremen, as usual,
and heard at every corner of the streets that the "dutch" were
moving on camp jackson. people were barricading their houses, and
men were running in that direction. i hurried through my business
as quickly as i could, and got back to my house on locust street by
twelve o'clock. charles ewing and hunter were there, and insisted
on going out to the camp to see "the fun." i tried to dissuade
them, saying that in case of conflict the bystanders were more
likely to be killed than the men engaged, but they would go. i felt
as much interest as anybody else, but staid at home, took my little
son willie, who was about seven years old, and walked up and down
the pavement in front of our house, listening for the sound of
musketry or cannon in the direction of camp jackson. while so
engaged miss eliza dean, who lived opposite us, called me across
the street, told me that her brother-in-law, dr. scott, was a
surgeon in frost's camp, and she was dreadfully afraid he would be
killed. i reasoned with her that general lyon was a regular
officer; that if he had gone out, as reported, to camp jackson, he
would take with him such a force as would make resistance
impossible; but she would not be comforted, saying that the camp
was made up of the young men from the first and best families of
st. louis, and that they were proud, and would fight. i explained
that young men of the best families did not like to be killed
better than ordinary people. edging gradually up the street, i was
in olive street just about twelfth, when i saw a man running from
the direction of camp jackson at full speed, calling, as he went,
"they've surrendered, they've surrendered!" so i turned back and
rang the bell at mrs. dean's. eliza came to the door, and i
explained what i had heard; but she angrily slammed the door in my
face! evidently she was disappointed to find she was mistaken in
her estimate of the rash courage of the best families.
i again turned in the direction of camp jackson, my boy willie
with me still. at the head of olive street, abreast of lindell's
grove, i found frank blair's regiment in the street, with ranks
opened, and the camp jackson prisoners inside. a crowd of people
was gathered around, calling to the prisoners by name, some
hurrahing for jeff davis, and others encouraging the troops. men,
women, and children, were in the crowd. i passed along till i found
myself inside the grove, where i met charles ewing and john hunter,
and we stood looking at the troops on the road, heading toward the
city. a band of music was playing at the head, and the column made
one or two ineffectual starts, but for some reason was halted. the
battalion of regulars was abreast of me, of which major rufus
saxton was in command, and i gave him an evening paper, which i had
bought of the newsboy on my way out. he was reading from it some
piece of news, sitting on his horse, when the column again began to
move forward, and he resumed his place at the head of his command.
at that part of the road, or street, was an embankment about eight
feet high, and a drunken fellow tried to pass over it to the people
opposite.
one of the regular sergeant file-closers ordered him back, but
he attempted to pass through the ranks, when the sergeant barred
his progress with his musket "a-port." the drunken man seized his
musket, when the sergeant threw him off with violence, and he
rolled over and over down the bank. by the time this man had picked
himself up and got his hat, which had fallen off, and had again
mounted the embankment, the regulars had passed, and the head of
osterhaus's regiment of home guards had come up. the man had in his
hand a small pistol, which he fired off, and i heard that the ball
had struck the leg of one of osterhaus's staff; the regiment
stopped; there was a moment of confusion, when the soldiers of that
regiment began to fire over our heads in the grove. i heard the
balls cutting the leaves above our heads, and saw several men and
women running in all directions, some of whom were wounded. of
course there was a general stampede. charles ewing threw willie on
the ground and covered him with his body. hunter ran behind the
hill, and i also threw myself on the ground. the fire ran back from
the head of the regiment toward its rear, and as i saw the men
reloading their pieces, i jerked willie up, ran back with him into
a gully which covered us, lay there until i saw that the fire had
ceased, and that the column was again moving on, when i took up
willie and started back for home round by way of market street. a
woman and child were killed outright; two or three men were also
killed, and several others were wounded. the great mass of the
people on that occasion were simply curious spectators, though men
were sprinkled through the crowd calling out, "hurrah for jeff
davis!" and others were particularly abusive of the "damned dutch"
lyon posted a guard in charge of the vacant camp, and marched his
prisoners down to the arsenal; some were paroled, and others held,
till afterward they were regularly exchanged.
a very few days after this event, may th, i received a
dispatch from my brother charles in washington, telling me to come
on at once; that i had been appointed a colonel of the thirteenth
regular infantry, and that i was wanted at washington
immediately.
of course i could no longer defer action. i saw mr. lucas, major
turner, and other friends and parties connected with the road, who
agreed that i should go on. i left my family, because i was under
the impression that i would be allowed to enlist my own regiment,
which would take some time, and i expected to raise the regiment
and organize it at jefferson barracks. i repaired to washington,
and there found that the government was trying to rise to a level
with the occasion. mr. lincoln had, without the sanction of law,
authorized the raising of ten new regiments of regulars, each
infantry regiment to be composed of three battalions of eight
companies each; and had called for seventy-five thousand state
volunteers. even this call seemed to me utterly inadequate; still
it was none of my business. i took the oath of office, and was
furnished with a list of officers, appointed to my regiment, which
was still, incomplete. i reported in person to general scott, at
his office on seventeenth street, opposite the war department, and
applied for authority to return west, and raise my regiment at
jefferson barracks, but the general said my lieutenant-colonel,
burbank, was fully qualified to superintend the enlistment, and
that he wanted me there; and he at once dictated an order for me to
report to him in person for inspection duty.
satisfied that i would not be permitted to return to st. louis,
i instructed mrs. sherman to pack up, return to lancaster, and
trust to the fate of war.
i also resigned my place as president of the fifth street
railroad, to take effect at the end of may, so that in fact i
received pay from that road for only two months' service, and then
began my new army career.
and now that, in these notes, i have fairly reached the period
of the civil war, which ravaged our country from  to
—an event involving a conflict of passion, of prejudice,
and of arms, that has developed results which, for better or worse,
have left their mark on the world's history—i feel that i
tread on delicate ground.
i have again and again been invited to write a history of the
war, or to record for publication my personal recollections of it,
with large offers of money therefor; all of which i have heretofore
declined, because the truth is not always palatable, and should not
always be told. many of the actors in the grand drama still live,
and they and their friends are quick to controversy, which should
be avoided. the great end of peace has been attained, with little
or no change in our form of government, and the duty of all good
men is to allow the passions of that period to subside, that we may
direct our physical and mental labor to repair the waste of war,
and to engage in the greater task of continuing our hitherto
wonderful national development.
what i now propose to do is merely to group some of my personal
recollections about the historic persons and events of the day,
prepared not with any view to their publication, but rather for
preservation till i am gone; and then to be allowed to follow into
oblivion the cords of similar papers, or to be used by some
historian who may need them by way of illustration.
i have heretofore recorded how i again came into the military
service of the united states as a colonel of the thirteenth regular
infantry, a regiment that had no existence at the time, and that,
instead of being allowed to enlist the men and instruct them, as
expected, i was assigned in washington city, by an order of
lieutenant-general winfield scott, to inspection duty near him on
the th of june, .
at that time lieutenant-general scott commanded the army in
chief, with colonel e. d. townsend as his adjutant-general,
major g. w. cullum, united states engineers, and major schuyler
hamilton, as aides.-de-camp. the general had an office up stairs on
seventeenth street, opposite the war department, and resided in a
house close by, on pennsylvania avenue. all fears for the immediate
safety of the capital had ceased, and quite a large force of
regulars and volunteers had been collected in and about washington.
brigadier-general j. k. mansfield commanded in the city, and
brigadier-general irvin mcdowell on the other side of the potomac,
with his headquarters at arlington house. his troops extended in a
semicircle from alexandria to above georgetown. several forts and
redoubts were either built or in progress, and the people were
already clamorous for a general forward movement. another
considerable army had also been collected in pennsylvania under
general patterson, and, at the time i speak of, had moved forward
to hagerstown and williamsport, on the potomac river. my brother,
john sherman, was a volunteer aide-de-camp to general patterson,
and, toward the end of june, i went up to hagerstown to see him. i
found that army in the very act of moving, and we rode down to
williamsport in a buggy, and were present when the leading division
crossed the potomac river by fording it waist-deep. my friend and
classmate, george h. thomas, was there, in command of a brigade in
the leading division. i talked with him a good deal, also with
general cadwalader, and with the staff-officers of general
patterson, viz., fitz-john porter, belger, beckwith, and others,
all of whom seemed encouraged to think that the war was to be short
and decisive, and that, as soon as it was demonstrated that the
general government meant in earnest to defend its rights and
property, some general compromise would result.
patterson's army crossed the potomac river on the st or d of
july, and, as john sherman was to take his seat as a senator in the
called session of congress, to meet july th, he resigned his place
as aide-de-camp, presented me his two horses and equipment, and we
returned to washington together.
the congress assembled punctually on the th of july, and the
message of mr. lincoln was strong and good: it recognized the fact
that civil war was upon us, that compromise of any kind was at an
end; and he asked for four hundred thousand men, and four hundred
million dollars, wherewith to vindicate the national authority, and
to regain possession of the captured forts and other property of
the united states.
it was also immediately demonstrated that the tone and temper of
congress had changed since the southern senators and members had
withdrawn, and that we, the military, could now go to work with
some definite plans and ideas.
the appearance of the troops about washington was good, but it
was manifest they were far from being soldiers. their uniforms were
as various as the states and cities from which they came; their
arms were also of every pattern and calibre; and they were so
loaded down with overcoats, haversacks, knapsacks, tents, and
baggage, that it took from twenty-five to fifty wagons to move the
camp of a regiment from one place to another, and some of the camps
had bakeries and cooking establishments that would have done credit
to delmonico.
while i was on duty with general scott, viz., from june th to
about june th, the general frequently communicated to those about
him his opinions and proposed plans. he seemed vexed with the
clamors of the press for immediate action, and the continued
interference in details by the president, secretary of war, and
congress. he spoke of organizing a grand army of invasion, of which
the regulars were to constitute the "iron column," and seemed to
intimate that he himself would take the field in person, though he
was at the time very old, very heavy, and very unwieldy. his age
must have been about seventy-five years.
at that date, july , , the rebels had two armies in front
of washington; the one at manassas junction, commanded by general
beauregard, with his advance guard at fairfax court house, and
indeed almost in sight of washington. the other, commanded by
general joe johnston, was at winchester, with its advance at
martinsburg and harper's ferry; but the advance had fallen back
before patterson, who then occupied martinsburg and the line of the
baltimore & ohio railroad.
the temper of congress and the people would not permit the slow
and methodical preparation desired by general scott; and the cry of
"on to richmond!" which was shared by the volunteers, most of whom
had only engaged for ninety days, forced general scott to hasten
his preparations, and to order a general advance about the middle
of july. mcdowell was to move from the defenses of washington, and
patterson from martinsburg. in the organization of mcdowell's army
into divisions and brigades, colonel david hunter was assigned to
command the second division, and i was ordered to take command of
his former brigade, which was composed of five regiments in
position in and about fort corcoran, and on the ground opposite
georgetown. i assumed command on the th of june, and proceeded at
once to prepare it for the general advance. my command constituted
the third brigade of the first division, which division was
commanded by brigadier-general daniel tyler, a graduate of west
point, but who had seen little or no actual service. i applied to
general mcdowell for home staff-officers, and he gave me, as
adjutant-general, lieutenant piper, of the third artillery, and, as
aide-de-camp, lieutenant mcquesten, a fine young cavalry-officer,
fresh from west point.
i selected for the field the thirteenth new york, colonel
quinby; the sixty-ninth new york, colonel corcoran; the
seventy-ninth new york, colonel cameron; and the second wisconsin,
lieutenant—colonel peck. these were all good, strong,
volunteer regiments, pretty well commanded; and i had reason to
believe that i had one of the best brigades in the whole army.
captain ayres's battery of the third regular artillery was also
attached to my brigade. the other regiment, the twenty-ninth new
york, colonel bennett, was destined to be left behind in charge of
the forts and camps during our absence, which was expected to be
short. soon after i had assumed the command, a difficulty arose in
the sixty-ninth, an irish regiment. this regiment had volunteered
in new york, early in april, for ninety days; but, by reason of the
difficulty of passing through baltimore, they had come via
annapolis, had been held for duty on the railroad as a guard for
nearly a month before they actually reached washington, and were
then mustered in about a month after enrollment. some of the men
claimed that they were entitled to their discharge in ninety days
from the time of enrollment, whereas the muster-roll read ninety
days from the date of muster-in. one day, colonel corcoran
explained this matter to me. i advised him to reduce the facts to
writing, and that i would submit it to the war department for an
authoritative decision. he did so, and the war department decided
that the muster-roll was the only contract of service, that it
would be construed literally; and that the regiment would be held
till the expiration of three months from the date of muster-in,
viz., to about august , . general scott at the same time wrote
one of his characteristic letters to corcoran, telling him that we
were about to engage in battle, and he knew his irish friends would
not leave him in such a crisis. corcoran and the officers generally
wanted to go to the expected battle, but a good many of the men
were not so anxious. in the second wisconsin, also, was developed a
personal difficulty. the actual colonel was s. p. coon, a
good-hearted gentleman, who knew no more of the military art than a
child; whereas his lieutenant-colonel, peck, had been to west
point, and knew the drill. preferring that the latter should remain
in command of the regiment, i put colonel coon on my personal
staff, which reconciled the difficulty.
in due season, about july th, our division moved forward
leaving our camps standing; keyes's brigade in the lead, then
schenck's, then mine, and richardson's last. we marched via vienna,
germantown, and centreville, where all the army, composed of five
divisions, seemed to converge. the march demonstrated little save
the general laxity of discipline; for with all my personal efforts
i could not prevent the men from straggling for water,
blackberries, or any thing on the way they fancied.
at centreville, on the th, richardson's brigade was sent by
general tyler to reconnoitre blackburn's ford across bull run, and
he found it strongly guarded. from our camp, at centreville, we
heard the cannonading, and then a sharp musketry-fire. i received
orders from general tyler to send forward ayres's battery, and very
soon after another order came for me to advance with my whole
brigade. we marched the three miles at the double-quick, arrived in
time to relieve richardson's brigade, which was just drawing back
from the ford, worsted, and stood for half an hour or so under a
fire of artillery, which killed four or five of my men. general
tyler was there in person, giving directions, and soon after he
ordered us all back to our camp in centreville. this reconnoissance
had developed a strong force, and had been made without the orders
of general mcdowell; however, it satisfied us that the enemy was in
force on the other side of bull run, and had no intention to leave
without a serious battle. we lay in camp at centreville all of the
th and th, and during that night began the movement which
resulted in the battle of bull run, on july st. of this so much
has been written that more would be superfluous; and the reports of
the opposing commanders, mcdowell and johnston, are fair and
correct. it is now generally admitted that it was one of the
best-planned battles of the war, but one of the worst-fought. our
men had been told so often at home that all they had to do was to
make a bold appearance, and the rebels would run; and nearly all of
us for the first time then heard the sound of cannon and muskets in
anger, and saw the bloody scenes common to all battles, with which
we were soon to be familiar. we had good organization, good men,
but no cohesion, no real discipline, no respect for authority, no
real knowledge of war. both armies were fairly defeated, and,
whichever had stood fast, the other would have run. though the
north was overwhelmed with mortification and shame, the south
really had not much to boast of, for in the three or four hours of
fighting their organization was so broken up that they did not and
could not follow our army, when it was known to be in a state of
disgraceful and causeless flight. it is easy to criticise a battle
after it is over, but all now admit that none others, equally raw
in war, could have done better than we did at bull run; and the
lesson of that battle should not be lost on a people like ours.
i insert my official report, as a condensed statement of my
share in the battle:
fort corcoran, july , 
to captain a. baird, assistant adjutant-general, first division
(general tyler's).
sir: i have the honor to submit this my report of the operations of
my brigade during the action of the st instant. the brigade is
composed of the thirteenth new york volunteers, colonel quinby's
sixty-ninth new york, colonel corcoran; seventy-ninth new york,
colonel cameron; second wisconsin, lieutenant-colonel peck; and
company e, third artillery, under command of captain r. b. ayres,
fifth artillery.
we left our camp near centreville, pursuant to orders, at half-past
 a. m., taking place in your column, next to the brigade of
general schenck, and proceeded as far as the halt, before the
enemy's position, near the stone bridge across bull run. here the
brigade was deployed in line along the skirt of timber to the right
of the warrenton road, and remained quietly in position till after
 a.m. the enemy remained very quiet, but about that time we saw a
rebel regiment leave its cover in our front, and proceed in
double-quick time on the road toward sudley springs, by which we
knew the columns of colonels hunter and heintzelman were
approaching. about the same time we observed in motion a large mass
of the enemy, below and on the other side of the stone bridge. i
directed captain ayres to take position with his battery near our
right, and to open fire on this mass; but you had previously
detached the two rifle-guns belonging to this battery, and, finding
that the smooth-bore guns did not reach the enemy's position, we
ceased firing, and i sent a request that you would send to me the
thirty-pounder rifle-gun attached to captain carlisle's battery. at
the same time i shifted the new york sixty-ninth to the extreme
right of the brigade. thus we remained till we heard the
musketry-fire across bull run, showing that the head of colonel
hunter's column was engaged. this firing was brisk, and showed that
hunter was driving before him the enemy, till about noon, when it
became certain the enemy had come to a stand, and that our forces
on the other side of bull run were all engaged, artillery and
infantry.
here you sent me the order to cross over with the whole brigade, to
the assistance of colonel hunter. early in the day, when
reconnoitring the ground, i had seen a horseman descend from a
bluff in our front, cross the stream, and show himself in the open
field on this aide; and, inferring that we could cross over at the
same point, i sent forward a company as skirmishers, and followed
with the whole brigade, the new york sixty-ninth leading.
we found no difficulty in crossing over, and met with no opposition
in ascending the steep bluff opposite with our infantry, but it was
impassable to the artillery, and i sent word back to captain ayres
to follow if possible, otherwise to use his discretion. captain
ayres did not cross bull run, but remained on that side, with the
rest of your division. his report herewith describes his operations
during the remainder of the day. advancing slowly and cautiously
with the head of the column, to give time for the regiments in
succession to close up their ranks, we first encountered a party of
the enemy retreating along a cluster of pines; lieutenant-colonel
haggerty, of the sixty-ninth, without orders, rode out alone, and
endeavored to intercept their retreat. one of the enemy, in full
view, at short range, shot haggerty, and he fell dead from his
horse. the sixty-ninth opened fire on this party, which was
returned; but, determined to effect our junction with hunter's
division, i ordered this fire to cease, and we proceeded with
caution toward the field where we then plainly saw our forces
engaged. displaying our colors conspicuously at the head of our
column, we succeeded in attracting the attention of our friends,
and soon formed the brigade in rear of colonel porter's. here i
learned that colonel hunter was disabled by a severe wound, and
that general mcdowell was on the field. i sought him out, and
received his orders to join in pursuit of the enemy, who was
falling back to the left of the road by which the army had
approached from sudley springs. placing colonel quinby's regiment
of rifles in front, in column, by division, i directed the other
regiments to follow in line of battle, in the order of the
wisconsin second, new york seventy-ninth, and new york sixty-ninth.
quinby's regiment advanced steadily down the hill and up the ridge,
from which he opened fire upon the enemy, who had made another
stand on ground very favorable to him, and the regiment continued
advancing as the enemy gave way, till the head of the column
reached the point near which rickett's battery was so severely cut
up. the other regiments descended the hill in line of battle, under
a severe cannonade; and, the ground affording comparative shelter
from the enemy's artillery, they changed direction, by the right
flank, and followed the road before mentioned. at the point where
this road crosses the ridge to our left front, the ground was swept
by a most severe fire of artillery, rifles, and musketry, and we
saw, in succession, several regiments driven from it; among them
the zouaves and battalion of marines. before reaching the crest of
this hill, the roadway was worn deep enough to afford shelter, and
i kept the several regiments in it as long as possible; but when
the wisconsin second was abreast of the enemy, by order of major
wadsworth, of general mcdowell's staff, i ordered it to leave the
roadway, by the left flank, and to attack the enemy.
this regiment ascended to the brow of the hill steadily, received
the severe fire of the enemy, returned it with spirit, and
advanced, delivering its fire. this regiment is uniformed in gray
cloth, almost identical with that of the great bulk of the
secession army; and, when the regiment fell into confusion and
retreated toward the road, there was a universal cry that they were
being fired on by our own men. the regiment rallied again, passed
the brow of the hill a second time, but was again repulsed in
disorder. by this time the new york seventy-ninth had closed up,
and in like manner it was ordered to cross the brow of, the hill,
and drive the enemy from cover. it was impossible to get a good
view of this ground. in it there was one battery of artillery,
which poured an incessant fire upon our advancing column, and the
ground was very irregular with small clusters of pines, affording
shelter, of which the enemy took good advantage. the fire of rifles
and musketry was very severe. the seventy-ninth, headed by its
colonel, cameron, charged across the hill, and for a short time the
contest was severe; they rallied several times under fire, but
finally broke, and gained the cover of the hill.
this left the field open to the new york sixty-ninth, colonel
corcoran, who, in his turn, led his regiment over the crest; and
had in full, open view the ground so severely contested; the fire
was very severe, and the roar of cannon, musketry, and rifles,
incessant; it was manifest the enemy was here in great force, far
superior to us at that point. the sixty-ninth held the ground for
some time, but finally fell back in disorder.
all this time quinby's regiment occupied another ridge, to our
left, overlooking the same field of action, and similarly engaged.
here, about half-past  p.m., began the scene of confusion and
disorder that characterized the remainder of the day. up to that
time, all had kept their places, and seemed perfectly cool, and
used to the shell and shot that fell, comparatively harmless, all
around us; but the short exposure to an intense fire of small-arms,
at close range, had killed many, wounded more, and had produced
disorder in all of the battalions that had attempted to encounter
it. men fell away from their ranks, talking, and in great
confusion. colonel cameron had been mortally wounded, was carried
to an ambulance, and reported dying. many other officers were
reported dead or missing, and many of the wounded were making their
way, with more or less assistance, to the buildings used as
hospitals, on the ridge to the west. we succeeded in partially
reforming the regiments, but it was manifest that they would not
stand, and i directed colonel corcoran to move along the ridge to
the rear, near the position where we had first formed the brigade.
general mcdowell was there in person, and need all possible efforts
to reassure the men. by the active exertions of colonel corcoran,
we formed an irregular square against the cavalry which were then
seen to issue from the position from which we had been driven, and
we began our retreat toward the same ford of bull run by which we
had approached the field of battle. there was no positive order to
retreat, although for an hour it had been going on by the operation
of the men themselves. the ranks were thin and irregular, and we
found a stream of people strung from the hospital across bull run,
and far toward centreville. after putting in motion the irregular
square in person, i pushed forward to find captain ayres's battery
at the crossing of bull run. i sought it at its last position,
before the brigade had crossed over, but it was not there; then
passing through the woods, where, in the morning, we had first
formed line, we approached the blacksmith's shop, but there found a
detachment of the secession cavalry and thence made a circuit,
avoiding cub run bridge, into centreville, where i found general
mcdowell, and from him understood that it was his purpose to rally
the forces, and make a stand at centreville.
but, about nine o'clock at night, i received from general tyler, in
person, the order to continue the retreat to the potomac. this
retreat was by night, and disorderly in the extreme. the men of
different regiments mingled together, and some reached the river at
arlington, some at long bridge, and the greater part returned to
their former camp, at or near fort corcoran. i reached this point
at noon the next day, and found a miscellaneous crowd crossing over
the aqueduct and ferries.. conceiving this to be demoralizing, i at
once commanded the guard to be increased, and all persons
attempting to pass over to be stopped. this soon produced its
effect; men sought their proper companies and regiments.
comparative order was restored, and all were posted to the best
advantage.
i herewith inclose the official report of captain belly, commanding
officer of the new york sixty-ninth; also, fall lists of the
killed, wounded, and missing.
our loss was heavy, and occurred chiefly at the point near where
rickett's battery was destroyed. lieutenant-colonel haggerty was
killed about noon, before we had effected a junction with colonel
hunter's division. colonel cameron was mortally wounded leading his
regiment in the charge, and colonel corcoran has been missing since
the cavalry-charge near the building used as a hospital.
for names, rank, etc., of the above, i refer to the lists
herewith.
lieutenants piper and mcquesten, of my personal staff, were under
fire all day, and carried orders to and fro with as much coolness
as on parade. lieutenant bagley, of the new york sixty-ninth, a
volunteer aide, asked leave to serve with his company, during the
action, and is among those reported missing. i have intelligence
that he is a prisoner, and slightly wounded.
colonel coon, of wisconsin, a volunteer aide, also rendered good
service during the day.
w. t. sherman, colonel commanding brigade.
this report, which i had not read probably since its date till
now, recalls to me vividly the whole scene of the affair at
blackburn's ford, when for the first time in my life i saw
cannonballs strike men and crash through the trees and saplings
above and around us, and realized the always sickening confusion as
one approaches a fight from the rear; then the night-march from
centreville, on the warrenton road, standing for hours wondering
what was meant; the deployment along the edge of the field that
sloped down to bull-run, and waiting for hunter's approach on the
other aide from the direction of sudley springs, away off to our
right; the terrible scare of a poor negro who was caught between
our lines; the crossing of bull run, and the fear lest we should be
fired on by our own men; the killing of lieutenant-colonel
haggerty, which occurred in plain sight; and the first scenes of a
field strewed with dead men and horses. yet, at that period of the
battle, we were the victors and felt jubilant. at that moment,
also, my brigade passed hunter's division; but heintzelman's was
still ahead of us, and we followed its lead along the road toward
manassas junction, crossing a small stream and ascending a long
hill, at the summit of which the battle was going on. here my
regiments came into action well, but successively, and were driven
back, each in its turn. for two hours we continued to dash at the
woods on our left front, which were full of rebels; but i was
convinced their organization was broken, and that they had simply
halted there and taken advantage of these woods as a cover, to
reach which we had to pass over the intervening fields about the
henry house, which were clear, open, and gave them a decided
advantage. after i had put in each of my regiments, and had them
driven back to the cover of the road, i had no idea that we were
beaten, but reformed the regiments in line in their proper order,
and only wanted a little rest, when i found that my brigade was
almost alone, except syke's regulars, who had formed square against
cavalry and were coming back. i then realized that the whole army
was "in retreat," and that my own men were individually making back
for the stone bridge. corcoran and i formed the brigade into an
irregular square, but it fell to pieces; and, along with a crowd,
disorganized but not much scared, the brigade got back to
centreville to our former camps. corcoran was captured, and held a
prisoner for some time; but i got safe to centreville. i saw
general mcdowell in centreville, and understood that several of his
divisions had not been engaged at all, that he would reorganize
them at centreville, and there await the enemy. i got my four
regiments in parallel lines in a field, the same in which we had
camped before the battle, and had lain down to sleep under a tree,
when i heard some one asking for me. i called out where i was, when
general tyler in person gave me orders to march back to our camps
at fort corcoran. i aroused my aides, gave them orders to call up
the sleeping men, have each regiment to leave the field by a flank
and to take the same road back by which we had come. it was near
midnight, and the road was full of troops, wagons, and batteries.
we tried to keep our regiments separate, but all became
inextricably mixed. toward morning we reached vienna, where i slept
some hours, and the next day, about noon, we reached fort
corcoran.
a slow, mizzling rain had set in, and probably a more gloomy day
never presented itself. all organization seemed to be at an end;
but i and my staff labored hard to collect our men into their
proper companies and into their former camps, and, on the d of
july, i moved the second wisconsin and seventy-ninth new york
closer in to fort corcoran, and got things in better order than i
had expected. of course, we took it for granted that the rebels
would be on our heels, and we accordingly prepared to defend our
posts. by the th i had collected all the materials, made my
report, and had my brigade about as well governed as any in that
army; although most of the ninety-day men, especially the
sixty-ninth, had become extremely tired of the war, and wanted to
go home. some of them were so mutinous, at one time, that i had the
battery to unlimber, threatening, if they dared to leave camp
without orders, i would open fire on them. drills and the daily
exercises were resumed, and i ordered that at the three principal
roll-calls the men should form ranks with belts and muskets, and
that they should keep their ranks until i in person had received
the reports and had dismissed them. the sixty-ninth still occupied
fort corcoran, and one morning, after reveille, when i had just
received the report, had dismissed the regiment, and was leaving, i
found myself in a crowd of men crossing the drawbridge on their way
to a barn close by, where they had their sinks; among them was an
officer, who said: "colonel, i am going to new york today. what can
i do for you?" i answered: "how can you go to new york? i do not
remember to have signed a leave for you." he said, "no; he did not
want a leave. he had engaged to serve three months, and had already
served more than that time. if the government did not intend to pay
him, he could afford to lose the money; that he was a lawyer, and
had neglected his business long enough, and was then going home." i
noticed that a good many of the soldiers had paused about us to
listen, and knew that, if this officer could defy me, they also
would. so i turned on him sharp, and said: "captain, this question
of your term of service has been submitted to the rightful
authority, and the decision has been published in orders. you are a
soldier, and must submit to orders till you are properly
discharged. if you attempt to leave without orders, it will be
mutiny, and i will shoot you like a dog! go back into the fort now,
instantly, and don't dare to leave without my consent." i had on an
overcoat, and may have had my hand about the breast, for he looked
at me hard, paused a moment, and then turned back into the fort.
the men scattered, and i returned to the house where i was
quartered, close by.
that same day, which must have been about july th, i was near
the river-bank, looking at a block-house which had been built for
the defense of the aqueduct, when i saw a carriage coming by the
road that crossed the potomac river at georgetown by a ferry. i
thought i recognized in the carriage the person of president
lincoln. i hurried across a bend, so as to stand by the road-side
as the carriage passed. i was in uniform, with a sword on, and was
recognized by mr. lincoln and mr. seward, who rode side by side in
an open hack. i inquired if they were going to my camps, and mr.
lincoln said: "yes; we heard that you had got over the big scare,
and we thought we would come over and see the 'boys.'" the roads
had been much changed and were rough. i asked if i might give
directions to his coachman, he promptly invited me to jump in and
to tell the coachman which way to drive. intending to begin on the
right and follow round to the left, i turned the driver into a
side-road which led up a very steep hill, and, seeing a soldier,
called to him and sent him up hurriedly to announce to the colonel
(bennett, i think) that the president was coming: as we slowly
ascended the hill, i discovered that mr. lincoln was full of
feeling, and wanted to encourage our men. i asked if he intended to
speak to them, and he said he would like to. i asked him then to
please discourage all cheering, noise, or any sort of confusion;
that we had had enough of it before bull run to ruin any set of
men, and that what we needed were cool, thoughtful, hard-fighting
soldiers—no more hurrahing, no more humbug. he took my
remarks in the most perfect good-nature. before we had reached the
first camp, i heard the drum beating the "assembly," saw the men
running for their tents, and in a few minutes the regiment was in
line, arms presented, and then brought to an order and "parade
rest!"
mr. lincoln stood up in the carriage, and made one of the
neatest, best, and most feeling addresses i ever listened to,
referring to our late disaster at bull run, the high duties that
still devolved on us, and the brighter days yet to come. at one or
two points the soldiers began to cheer, but he promptly checked
them, saying: "don't cheer, boys. i confess i rather like it
myself, but colonel sherman here says it is not military; and i
guess we had better defer to his opinion." in winding up, he
explained that, as president, he was commander-in-chief; that he
was resolved that the soldiers should have every thing that the law
allowed; and he called on one and all to appeal to him personally
in case they were wronged. the effect of this speech was
excellent.
we passed along in the same manner to all the camps of my
brigade; and mr. lincoln complimented me highly for the order,
cleanliness, and discipline, that he observed. indeed, he and mr.
seward both assured me that it was the first bright moment they had
experienced since the battle.
at last we reached fort corcoran. the carriage could not enter,
so i ordered the regiment, without arms, to come outside, and
gather about mr. lincoln, who would speak to them. he made to them
the same feeling address, with more personal allusions, because of
their special gallantry in the battle under corcoran, who was still
a prisoner in the hands of the enemy; and he concluded with the
same general offer of redress in case of grievances. in the crowd i
saw the officer with whom i had had the passage at reveille that
morning. his face was pale, and lips compressed. i foresaw a scene,
but sat on the front seat of the carriage as quiet as a lamb. this
officer forced his way through the crowd to the carriage, and said:
"mr. president, i have a cause of grievance. this morning i went to
speak to colonel sherman, and he threatened to shoot me." mr.
lincoln, who was still standing, said, "threatened to shoot you?"
"yes, sir, he threatened to shoot me." mr. lincoln looked at him,
then at me, and stooping his tall, spare form toward the officer,
said to him in a loud stage-whisper, easily heard for some yards
around: "well, if i were you, and he threatened to shoot, i would
not trust him, for i believe he would do it." the officer turned
about and disappeared, and the men laughed at him. soon the
carriage drove on, and, as we descended the hill, i explained the
facts to the president, who answered, "of course i didn't know any
thing about it, but i thought you knew your own business best." i
thanked him for his confidence, and assured him that what he had
done would go far to enable me to maintain good discipline, and it
did.
by this time the day was well spent. i asked to take my leave,
and the president and mr. seward drove back to washington. this
spirit of mutiny was common to the whole army, and was not subdued
till several regiments or parts of regiments had been ordered to
fort jefferson, florida, as punishment.
general mcdowell had resumed his headquarters at the arlington
house, and was busily engaged in restoring order to his army,
sending off the ninety-days men, and replacing them by regiments
which had come under the three-years call. we were all trembling
lest we should be held personally accountable for the disastrous
result of the battle. general mcclellan had been summoned from the
west to washington, and changes in the subordinate commands were
announced almost daily. i remember, as a group of officers were
talking in the large room of the arlington house, used as the
adjutant-general's office, one evening, some young officer came in
with a list of the new brigadiers just announced at the war
department, which-embraced the names of heintzehvan, keyes,
franklin, andrew porter, w. t. sherman, and others, who had been
colonels in the battle, and all of whom had shared the common
stampede. of course, we discredited the truth of the list; and
heintzehvan broke out in his nasal voice, "boys, it's all a lie!
every mother's son of you will be cashiered." we all felt he was
right, but, nevertheless, it was true; and we were all announced in
general orders as brigadier-generals of volunteers.
general mcclellan arrived, and, on assuming command, confirmed
mcdowell's organization. instead of coming over the river, as we
expected, he took a house in washington, and only came over from
time to time to have a review or inspection.
i had received several new regiments, and had begun two new
forts on the hill or plateau, above and farther out than fort
corcoran; and i organized a system of drills, embracing the
evolutions of the line, all of which was new to me, and i had to
learn the tactics from books; but i was convinced that we had a
long, hard war before us, and made up my mind to begin at the very
beginning to prepare for it.
august was passing, and troops were pouring in from all
quarters; general mcclellan told me he intended to organize an army
of a hundred thousand men, with one hundred field-batteries, and i
still hoped he would come on our side of the potomac, pitch his
tent, and prepare for real hard work, but his headquarters still
remained in a house in washington city. i then thought, and still
think, that was a fatal mistake. his choice as general-in-chief at
the time was fully justified by his high reputation in the army and
country, and, if he then had any political views or ambition, i
surely did not suspect it.
about the middle of august i got a note from brigadier-general
robert anderson, asking me to come and see him at his room at
willard's hotel. i rode over and found him in conversation with
several gentlemen, and he explained to me that events in kentucky
were approaching a crisis; that the legislature was in session, and
ready, as soon as properly backed by the general government, to
take open sides for the union cause; that he was offered the
command of the department of the cumberland, to embrace kentucky,
tennessee, etc., and that he wanted help, and that the president
had offered to allow him to select out of the new brigadiers four
of his own choice. i had been a lieutenant in captain anderson's
company, at fort moultrie, from  to , and he explained that
he wanted me as his right hand. he also indicated george h. thomas,
d. c. buell, and burnside, as the other three. of course, i always
wanted to go west, and was perfectly willing to go with anderson,
especially in a subordinate capacity: we agreed to call on the
president on a subsequent day, to talk with him about it, and we
did. it hardly seems probable that mr. lincoln should have come to
willard's hotel to meet us, but my impression is that he did, and
that general anderson had some difficulty in prevailing on him to
appoint george h. thomas, a native of virginia, to be
brigadier-general, because so many southern officers, had already
played false; but i was still more emphatic in my indorsement of
him by reason of my talk with him at the time he crossed the
potomac with patterson's army, when mr. lincoln promised to appoint
him and to assign him to duty with general anderson. in this
interview with mr. lincoln, i also explained to him my extreme
desire to serve in a subordinate capacity, and in no event to be
left in a superior command. he promised me this with promptness,
making the jocular remark that his chief trouble was to find places
for the too many generals who wanted to be at the head of affairs,
to command armies, etc.
the official order is dated:
[special order no. .]
washington, august , .
the following assignment is made of the general officers of the
volunteer service, whose appointment was announced in general
orders no. , from the war department
to the department of the cumberland, brigadier-general robert
anderson commanding:
brigadier-general w. t. sherman,
brigadier-general george h. thomas.
by command of lieutenant-general scott:
e. d. townsend, assistant adjutant-general.
after some days, i was relieved in command of my brigade and
post by brigadier general fitz-john porter, and at once took my
departure for cincinnati, ohio, via cresson, pennsylvania, where
general anderson was with his family; and he, thomas, and i, met by
appointment at the house of his brother, larz anderson, esq., in
cincinnati. we were there on the st and d of september, when
several prominent gentlemen of kentucky met us, to discuss the
situation, among whom were jackson, harlan, speed, and others. at
that time, william nelson, an officer of the navy, had been
commissioned a brigadier-general of volunteers, and had his camp at
dick robinson, a few miles beyond the kentucky river, south of
nicholasville; and brigadier-general l. h. rousseau had another
camp at jeffersonville, opposite louisville. the state legislature
was in session at frankfort, and was ready to take definite action
as soon as general anderson was prepared, for the state was
threatened with invasion from tennessee, by two forces: one from
the direction of nashville, commanded by generals albert sidney
johnston and buckner; and the other from the direction of
cumberland gap, commanded by generals crittenden and zollicoffer.
general anderson saw that he had not force enough to resist these
two columns, and concluded to send me in person for help to
indianapolis and springfield, to confer with the governors of
indiana, and illinois, and to general fremont, who commanded in st.
louis.
mcclellan and fremont were the two men toward whom the country
looked as the great union leaders, and toward them were streaming
the newly-raised regiments of infantry and cavalry, and batteries
of artillery; nobody seeming to think of the intervening link
covered by kentucky. while i was to make this tour, generals
anderson and thomas were to go to louisville and initiate the
department. none of us had a staff, or any of the machinery for
organizing an army, and, indeed, we had no army to organize.
anderson was empowered to raise regiments in kentucky, and to
commission a few brigadier-generals.
at indianapolis i found governor morton and all the state
officials busy in equipping and providing for the new regiments,
and my object was to divert some of them toward kentucky; but they
were called for as fast as they were mustered in, either for the
army of mcclellan or fremont. at springfield also i found the same
general activity and zeal, governor yates busy in providing for his
men; but these men also had been promised to fremont. i then went
on to st. louis, where all was seeming activity, bustle, and
preparation. meeting r. m. renick at the planters' house (where i
stopped), i inquired where i could find general fremont. renick
said, "what do you want with general fremont?" i said i had come to
see him on business; and he added, "you don't suppose that he will
see such as you?" and went on to retail all the scandal of the day:
that fremont was a great potentate, surrounded by sentries and
guards; that he had a more showy court than any real king; that he
kept senators, governors, and the first citizens, dancing
attendance for days and weeks before granting an audience, etc.;
that if i expected to see him on business, i would have to make my
application in writing, and submit to a close scrutiny by his chief
of staff and by his civil surroundings. of course i laughed at all
this, and renewed my simple inquiry as to where was his office, and
was informed that he resided and had his office at major brant's
new house on chouteau avenue. it was then late in the afternoon,
and i concluded to wait till the next morning; but that night i
received a dispatch from general anderson in louisville to hurry
back, as events were pressing, and he needed me.
accordingly, i rose early next morning before daybreak, got
breakfast with the early railroad-passengers, and about sunrise was
at the gate of general fremont's headquarters. a sentinel with
drawn sabre paraded up and down in front of the house. i had on my
undress uniform indicating my rank, and inquired of the sentinel,
"is general fremont up?" he answered, "i don't know." seeing that
he was a soldier by his bearing, i spoke in a sharp, emphatic
voice, "then find out." he called for the corporal of the guard,
and soon a fine-looking german sergeant came, to whom i addressed
the same inquiry. he in turn did not know, and i bade him find out,
as i had immediate and important business with the general. the
sergeant entered the house by the front-basement door, and after
ten or fifteen minutes the main front-door above was slowly opened
from the inside, and who should appear but my old san francisco
acquaintance isaiah c. woods, whom i had not seen or heard of since
his flight to australia, at the time of the failure of adams &
co. in ! he ushered me in hastily, closed the door, and
conducted me into the office on the right of the hall. we were glad
to meet, after so long and eventful an interval, and mutually
inquired after our respective families and special acquaintances. i
found that he was a commissioned officer, a major on duty with
fremont, and major eaton, now of the paymaster's department, was in
the same office with him. i explained to them that i had come from
general anderson, and wanted to confer with general fremont in
person. woods left me, but soon returned, said the general would
see me in a very few minutes, and within ten minutes i was shown
across the hall into the large parlor, where general fremont
received me very politely. we had met before, as early as , in
california, and i had also seen him several times when he was
senator. i then in a rapid manner ran over all the points of
interest in general anderson's new sphere of action, hoped he would
spare us from the new levies what troops he could, and generally
act in concert with us. he told me that his first business would be
to drive the rebel general price and his army out of missouri, when
he would turn his attention down the mississippi. he asked my
opinion about the various kinds of field-artillery which
manufacturers were thrusting on him, especially the then
newly-invented james gun, and afterward our conversation took a
wide turn about the character of the principal citizens of st.
louis, with whom i was well acquainted.
telling general fremont that i had been summoned to louisville
and that i should leave in the first train, viz., at  p.m., i took
my leave of him. returning to wood's office, i found there two more
californians, viz., messrs. palmer and haskell, so i felt that,
while fremont might be suspicious of others, he allowed free
ingress to his old california acquaintances.
returning to the planters' house, i heard of beard, another
californian, a mormon, who had the contract for the line of
redoubts which fremont had ordered to be constructed around the
city, before he would take his departure for the interior of the
state; and while i stood near the office-counter, i saw old baron
steinberger, a prince among our early california adventurers, come
in and look over the register. i avoided him on purpose, but his
presence in st. louis recalled the maxim, "where the vultures are,
there is a carcass close by;" and i suspected that the profitable
contracts of the quartermaster, mckinstry, had drawn to st. louis
some of the most enterprising men of california. i suspect they can
account for the fact that, in a very short time, fremont fell from
his high estate in missouri, by reason of frauds, or supposed
frauds, in the administration of the affairs of his command.
i left st. louis that afternoon and reached louisville the next
morning. i found general anderson quartered at the louisville
hotel, and he had taken a dwelling homes on ______ street as an
office. captain o. d. greens was his adjutant-general, lieutenant
throckmorton his aide, and captain prime, of the engineer corps,
was on duty with him. general george h. thomas had been dispatched
to camp dick robinson, to relieve nelson.
the city was full of all sorts of rumors. the legislature, moved
by considerations purely of a political nature, had taken the step,
whatever it was, that amounted to an adherence to the union,
instead of joining the already-seceded states. this was universally
known to be the signal for action. for it we were utterly
unprepared, whereas the rebels were fully prepared. general sidney
johnston immediately crossed into kentucky, and advanced as far as
bowling green, which he began to fortify, and thence dispatched
general buckner with a division forward toward louisville; general
zollicoffer, in like manner, entered the state and advanced as far
as somerset. on the day i reached louisville the excitement ran
high. it was known that columbus, kentucky, had been occupied,
september th, by a strong rebel force, under generals pillow and
polk, and that general grant had moved from cairo and occupied
paducah in force on the th. many of the rebel families expected
buckner to reach louisville at any moment. that night, general
anderson sent for me, and i found with him mr. guthrie, president
of the louisville & nashville railroad, who had in his hands a
dispatch to the effect that the bridge across the rolling fork of
salt creek, less than thirty miles out, had been burned, and that
buckner's force, en route for louisville, had been detained beyond
green river by a train thrown from the track. we learned afterward
that a man named bird had displaced a rail on purpose to throw the
train off the track, and thereby give us time.
mr. guthrie explained that in the ravine just beyond salt creek
were several high and important trestles which, if destroyed, would
take months to replace, and general anderson thought it well. worth
the effort to save them. also, on muldraugh's hill beyond, was a
strong position, which had in former years been used as the site
for the state "camp of instruction," and we all supposed that
general buckner, who was familiar with the ground, was aiming for a
position there, from which to operate on louisville.
all the troops we had to counteract buckner were rousseau's
legion, and a few home guards in louisville. the former were still
encamped across the river at jeffersonville; so general anderson
ordered me to go over, and with them, and such home guards as we
could collect, make the effort to secure possession of muldraugh's
hill before buckner could reach it. i took captain prime with me;
and crossed over to rousseau's camp. the long-roll was beaten, and
within an hour the men, to the number of about one thousand, were
marching for the ferry-boat and for the nashville depot. meantime
general anderson had sent to collect some home guards, and mr.
guthrie to get the trains ready. it was after midnight before we
began to move. the trains proceeded slowly, and it was daybreak
when we reached lebanon junction, twenty-six miles out, where we
disembarked, and marched to the bridge over salt river, which we
found had been burnt; whether to prevent buckner coming into
louisville, or us from going out, was not clear. rousseau's legion
forded the stream and marched up to the state camp of instruction,
finding the high trestles all secure. the railroad hands went to
work at once to rebuild the bridge. i remained a couple of days at
lebanon junction, during which general anderson forwarded two
regiments of volunteers that had come to him. before the bridge was
done we advanced the whole camp to the summit of muldraugh's hill,
just back of elizabethtown. there i learned definitely that general
buckner had not crossed green river at all, that general sidney
johnston was fortifying bowling green, and preparing for a
systematic advance into kentucky, of which he was a native, and
with whose people and geography he must have been familiar. as fast
as fresh troops reached louisville, they were sent out to me at
muldraugh's hill, where i was endeavoring to put them into shape
for service, and by the st of october i had the equivalent of a
division of two brigades preparing to move forward toward green
river. the daily correspondence between general anderson and myself
satisfied me that the worry and harassment at louisville were
exhausting his strength and health, and that he would soon leave.
on a telegraphic summons from him, about the th of october, i went
down to louisville, when general anderson said he could not stand
the mental torture of his command any longer, and that he must go
away, or it would kill him. on the th of october he actually
published an order relinquishing the command, and, by reason of my
seniority, i had no alternative but to assume command, though much
against the grain, and in direct violation of mr. lincoln's promise
to me. i am certain that, in my earliest communication to the war
department, i renewed the expression of my wish to remain in a
subordinate position, and that i received the assurance that
brigadier-general buell would soon arrive from california, and
would be sent to relieve me. by that time i had become pretty
familiar with the geography and the general resources of kentucky.
we had parties all over the state raising regiments and companies;
but it was manifest that the young men were generally inclined to
the cause of the south, while the older men of property wanted to
be let alone—i.e., to remain neutral. as to a forward
movement that fall, it was simply impracticable; for we were forced
to use divergent lines, leading our columns farther and farther
apart; and all i could attempt was to go on and collect force and
material at the two points already chosen, viz., dick robinson and
elizabethtown. general george h. thomas still continued to command
the former, and on the th of october i dispatched
brigadier-general a. mcd. mccook to command the latter, which had
been moved forward to nolin creek, fifty-two miles out of
louisville, toward bowling green. staff-officers began to arrive to
relieve us of the constant drudgery which, up to that time, had
been forced on general anderson and myself; and these were all good
men. colonel thomas swords, quartermaster, arrived on the th;
paymaster larned on the th; and lieutenant smyzer, fifth
artillery, acting ordnance-officer, on the th; captain symonds
was already on duty as the commissary of subsistence; captain o. d.
greene was the adjutant-general, and completed a good working
staff.
the everlasting worry of citizens complaining of every petty
delinquency of a soldier, and forcing themselves forward to discuss
politics, made the position of a commanding general no sinecure. i
continued to strengthen the two corps forward and their routes of
supply; all the time expecting that sidney johnston, who was a real
general, and who had as correct information of our situation as i
had, would unite his force with zollicoffer, and fall on thomas at
dick robinson, or mccook at nolin: had he done so in october, ,
he could have walked into louisville, and the vital part of the
population would have hailed him as a deliverer. why he did not,
was to me a mystery then and is now; for i know that he saw the
move; and had his wagons loaded up at one time for a start toward
frankfort, passing between our two camps. conscious of our
weakness, i was unnecessarily unhappy, and doubtless exhibited it
too much to those near me; but it did seem to me that the
government at washington, intent on the larger preparations of
fremont in missouri and mcclellan in washington, actually ignored
us in kentucky.
about this time, say the middle of october, i received notice,
by telegraph, that the secretary of war, mr. cameron (then in st.
louis), would visit me at louisville, on his way back to
washington. i was delighted to have an opportunity to properly
represent the actual state of affairs, and got mr. guthrie to go
with me across to jeffersonville, to meet the secretary of war and
escort him to louisville. the train was behind time, but mr.
guthrie and i waited till it actually arrived. mr. cameron was
attended by adjutant-general lorenzo thomas, and six or seven
gentlemen who turned out to be newspaper reporters. mr. cameron's
first inquiry was, when he could start for cincinnati, saying that,
as he had been detained at st. louis so long, it was important he
should hurry on to washington. i explained that the regular
mail-boat would leave very soon—viz., at  m.—but i
begged him to come over to louisville; that i wanted to see him on
business as important as any in washington, and hoped he would come
and spend at least a day with us. he asked if every thing was not
well with us, and i told him far from it; that things were actually
bad, as bad as bad could be. this seemed to surprise him, and mr.
guthrie added his persuasion to mine; when mr. cameron, learning
that he could leave louisville by rail via frankfort next morning
early, and make the same connections at cincinnati, consented to go
with us to louisville, with the distinct understanding that he must
leave early the next morning for washington.
we accordingly all took hacks, crossed the river by the ferry,
and drove to the galt house, where i was then staying.
brigadier-general t. j. wood had come down from indianapolis by the
same train, and was one of the party. we all proceeded to my room
on the first floor of the galt house, where our excellent landlord,
silas miller, esq., sent us a good lunch and something to drink.
mr. cameron was not well, and lay on my bed, but joined in the
general conversation. he and his party seemed to be full of the
particulars of the developments in st. louis of some of fremont's
extravagant contracts and expenses, which were the occasion of
cameron's trip to st. louis, and which finally resulted in
fremont's being relieved, first by general hunter, and after by
general h. w. halleck.
after some general conversation, mr. cameron called to me, "now,
general sherman, tell us of your troubles." i said i preferred not
to discuss business with so many strangers present. he said, "they
are all friends, all members of my family, and you may speak your
mind freely and without restraint." i am sure i stepped to the
door, locked it to prevent intrusion, and then fully and fairly
represented the state of affairs in kentucky, especially the
situation and numbers of my troops. i complained that the new
levies of ohio and indiana were diverted east and west, and we got
scarcely any thing; that our forces at nolin and dick robinson were
powerless for invasion, and only tempting to a general such as we
believed sidney johnston to be; that, if johnston chose, he could
march to louisville any day. cameron exclaimed: "you astonish me!
our informants, the kentucky senators and members of congress,
claim that they have in kentucky plenty of men, and all they want
are arms and money." i then said it was not true; for the young men
were arming and going out openly in broad daylight to the rebel
camps, provided with good horses and guns by their fathers, who
were at best "neutral;" and as to arms, he had, in washington,
promised general anderson forty thousand of the best springfield
muskets, instead of which we had received only about twelve
thousand belgian muskets, which the governor of pennsylvania had
refused, as had also the governor of ohio, but which had been
adjudged good enough for kentucky. i asserted that volunteer
colonels raising regiments in various parts of the state had come
to louisville for arms, and when they saw what i had to offer had
scorned to receive them—to confirm the truth of which i
appealed to mr. guthrie, who said that every word i had spoken was
true, and he repeated what i had often heard him say, that no man
who owned a slave or a mule in kentucky could be trusted.
mr. cameron appeared alarmed at what was said, and turned to
adjutant-general l. thomas, to inquire if he knew of any troops
available, that had not been already assigned. he mentioned
negley's pennsylvania brigade, at pittsburg, and a couple of other
regiments that were then en route for st. louis. mr. cameron
ordered him to divert these to louisville, and thomas made the
telegraphic orders on the spot. he further promised, on reaching
washington, to give us more of his time and assistance.
in the general conversation which followed, i remember taking a
large map of the united states, and assuming the people of the
whole south to be in rebellion, that our task was to subdue them,
showed that mcclellan was on the left, having a frontage of less
than a hundred miles, and fremont the right, about the same;
whereas i, the centre, had from the big sandy to paducah, over
three hundred miles of frontier; that mcclellan had a hundred
thousand men, fremont sixty thousand, whereas to me had only been
allotted about eighteen thousand. i argued that, for the purpose of
defense we should have sixty thousand men at once, and for offense,
would need two hundred thousand, before we were done. mr. cameron,
who still lay on the bed, threw up his hands and exclaimed, "great
god! where are they to come from?" i asserted that there were
plenty of men at the north, ready and willing to come, if he would
only accept their services; for it was notorious that regiments had
been formed in all the northwestern states, whose services had been
refused by the war department, on the ground that they would not be
needed. we discussed all these matters fully, in the most friendly
spirit, and i thought i had aroused mr. cameron to a realization of
the great war that was before us, and was in fact upon us. i heard
him tell general thomas to make a note of our conversation, that he
might attend to my requests on reaching washington. we all spent
the evening together agreeably in conversation, many union citizens
calling to pay their respects, and the next morning early we took
the train for frankfort; mr. cameron and party going on to
cincinnati and washington, and i to camp dick robinson to see
general thomas and the troops there.
i found general thomas in a tavern, with most of his regiments
camped about him. he had sent a small force some miles in advance
toward cumberland gap, under brigadier-general schoepf. remaining
there a couple of days, i returned to louisville; on the d of
october, general negley's brigade arrived in boats from pittsburg,
was sent out to camp nolin; and the thirty-seventh indiana.,
colonel hazzard, and second minnesota, colonel van cleve, also
reached louisville by rail, and were posted at elizabethtown and
lebanon junction. these were the same troops which had been ordered
by mr. cameron when at louisville, and they were all that i
received thereafter, prior to my leaving kentucky. on reaching
washington, mr. cameron called on general thomas, as he himself
afterward told me, to submit his memorandum of events during his
absence, and in that memorandum was mentioned my insane request for
two hundred thousand men. by some newspaper man this was seen and
published, and, before i had the least conception of it, i was
universally published throughout the country as "insane, crazy,"
etc. without any knowledge, however, of this fact, i had previously
addressed to the adjutant-general of the army at washington this
letter:
october , .
to general l. thomas, adjutant-general, washington, d. c.
sir: on my arrival at camp dick robinson, i found general thomas
had stationed a kentucky regiment at rock castle hill, beyond a
river of the same name, and had sent an ohio and an indiana
regiment forward in support. he was embarrassed for transportation,
and i authorized him to hire teams, and to move his whole force
nearer to his advance-guard, so as to support it, as he had
information of the approach of zollicoffer toward london. i have
just heard from him, that he had sent forward general schoepf with
colonel wolford's cavalry, colonel steadman's ohio regiment, and a
battery of artillery, followed on a succeeding day by a tennessee
brigade. he had still two kentucky regiments, the thirty-eighth
ohio and another battery of artillery, with which he was to follow
yesterday. this force, if concentrated, should be strong enough for
the purpose; at all events, it is all he had or i could give
him.
i explained to you fully, when here, the supposed position of our
adversaries, among which was a force in the valley of big sandy,
supposed to be advancing on paris, kentucky. general nelson at
maysville was instructed to collect all the men he could, and
colonel gill's regiment of ohio volunteers. colonel harris was
already in position at olympian springs, and a regiment lay at
lexington, which i ordered to his support. this leaves the line of
thomas's operations exposed, but i cannot help it. i explained so
fully to yourself and the secretary of war the condition of things,
that i can add nothing new until further developments, you know my
views that this great centre of our field is too weak, far too
weak, and i have begged and implored till i dare not say
more.
buckner still is beyond green river. he sent a detachment of his
men, variously estimated at from two to four thousand toward
greensburg. general ward, with about one thousand men, retreated to
campbellsburg, where he called to his assistance some
partially-formed regiments to the number of about two thousand. the
enemy did not advance, and general ward was at last dates at
campbellsburg. the officers charged with raising regiments must of
necessity be near their homes to collect men, and for this reason
are out of position; but at or near greensburg and lebanon, i
desire to assemble as large a force of the kentucky volunteers as
possible. this organization is necessarily irregular, but the
necessity is so great that i must have them, and therefore have
issued to them arms and clothing during the process of formation.
this has facilitated their enlistment; but inasmuch as the
legislature has provided money for organizing the kentucky
volunteers, and intrusted its disbursement to a board of loyal
gentlemen, i have endeavored to cooperate with them to hasten the
formation of these corps.
the great difficulty is, and has been, that as volunteers offer, we
have not arms and clothing to give them. the arms sent us are, as
you already know, european muskets of uncouth pattern, which the
volunteers will not touch.
general mccook has now three brigades—johnson's, wood's, and
rousseau's. negley's brigade arrived to-day, and will be sent out
at once. the minnesota regiment has also arrived, and will be sent
forward. hazzard's regiment of indiana troops i have ordered to the
month of salt creek, an important point on the turnpike-road
leading to elizabethtown.
i again repeat that our force here is out of all proportion to the
importance of the position. our defeat would be disastrous to the
nation; and to expect of new men, who never bore arms, to do
miracles, is not right.
i am, with much respect, yours truly,
w. t. sherman, brigadier-general commanding.
about this time my attention was drawn to the publication in all
the eastern papers, which of course was copied at the west, of the
report that i was "crazy, insane, and mad," that "i had demanded
two hundred thousand men for the defense of kentucky;" and the
authority given for this report was stated to be the secretary of
war himself, mr. cameron, who never, to my knowledge, took pains to
affirm or deny it. my position was therefore simply unbearable, and
it is probable i resented the cruel insult with language of intense
feeling. still i received no orders, no reenforcements, not a word
of encouragement or relief. about november st, general mcclellan
was appointed commander-in-chief of all the armies in the field,
and by telegraph called for a report from me. it is herewith
given:
headquarters the department of the cumberland, louisville,
kentucky, november , 
general l. thomas, adjutant-general, washington, d. c.
sir: in compliance with the telegraphic orders of general
mcclellan, received late last night, i submit this report of the
forces in kentucky, and of their condition.
the tabular statement shows the position of the several regiments.
the camp at nolin is at the present extremity of the nashville
railroad. this force was thrown forward to meet the advance of
buckner's army, which then fell back to green river, twenty-three
miles beyond. these regiments were substantially without means of
transportation, other than the railroad, which is guarded at all
dangerous points, yet is liable to interruption at any moment, by
the tearing up of a rail by the disaffected inhabitants or a hired
enemy. these regiments are composed of good materials, but devoid
of company officers of experience, and have been put under thorough
drill since being in camp. they are generally well clad, and
provided for. beyond green river, the enemy has masked his forces,
and it is very difficult to ascertain even the approximate numbers.
no pains have been spared to ascertain them, but without success,
and it is well known that they far outnumber us. depending,
however, on the railroads to their rear for transportation, they
have not thus far advanced this side of green river, except in
marauding parties. this is the proper line of advance, but will
require a very large force, certainly fifty thousand men, as their
railroad facilities south enable them to concentrate at
munfordsville the entire strength of the south. general mccook's
command is divided into four brigades, under generals wood, r. w.
johnson, rousseau, and negley.
general thomas's line of operations is from lexington, toward
cumberland gap and ford, which are occupied by a force of rebel
tennesseeans, under the command of zollicoffer. thomas occupies the
position at london, in front of two roads which lead to the fertile
part of kentucky, the one by richmond, and the other by crab
orchard, with his reserve at camp dick robinson, eight miles south
of the kentucky river. his provisions and stores go by railroad
from cincinnati to nicholasville, and thence in wagons to his
several regiments. he is forced to hire transportation.
brigadier-general nelson is operating by the line from olympian
springs, east of paris, on the covington & lexington railroad,
toward prestonburg, in the valley of the big sandy where is
assembled a force of from twenty-five to thirty-five hundred rebel
kentuckians waiting reenforcements from virginia. my last report
from him was to october th, at which time he had colonel harris's
ohio second, nine hundred strong; colonel norton's twenty-first
ohio, one thousand; and colonel sill's thirty-third ohio, seven
hundred and fifty strong; with two irregular kentucky regiments,
colonels marshall and metcalf. these troops were on the road near
hazel green and west liberty, advancing toward prestonburg.
upon an inspection of the map, you will observe these are all
divergent lines, but rendered necessary, from the fact that our
enemies choose them as places of refuge from pursuit, where they
can receive assistance from neighboring states. our lines are all
too weak, probably with the exception of that to prestonburg. to
strengthen these, i am thrown on the raw levies of ohio and
indiana, who arrive in detachments, perfectly fresh from the
country, and loaded down with baggage, also upon the kentuckians,
who are slowly forming regiments all over the state, at points
remote from danger, and whom it will be almost impossible to
assemble together. the organization of this latter force is, by the
laws of kentucky, under the control of a military board of
citizens, at the capital, frankfort, and they think they will be
enabled to have fifteen regiments toward the middle of this month,
but i doubt it, and deem it unsafe to rely on them: there are four
regiments forming in the neighborhood of owensboro, near the mouth
of green river, who are doing good service, also in the
neighborhood of campbellsville, but it is unsafe to rely on troops
so suddenly armed and equipped. they are not yet clothed or
uniformed. i know well you will think our force too widely
distributed, but we are forced to it by the attitude of our
enemies, whose force and numbers the country never has and probably
never will comprehend.
i am told that my estimate of troops needed for this line, viz.,
two hundred thousand, has been construed to my prejudice, and
therefore leave it for the future. this is the great centre on
which our enemies can concentrate whatever force is not employed
elsewhere. detailed statement of present force inclosed with
this.
with great respect, your obedient servant,
w. t. sherman, brigadier-general commanding.
brigadier-general mccook's camp, at nolin, fifty-two miles from
first brigade (general rousseau).-third kentucky, colonel bulkley;
fourth kentucky, colonel whittaker; first cavalry, colonel board;
stone's battery; two companies nineteenth united states infantry,
and two companies fifteenth united states infantry, captain
gilman.
second brigade (general t. j. wood).-thirty-eighth indiana, colonel
scribner; thirty-ninth indiana, colonel harrison; thirtieth
indiana, colonel bass; twenty-ninth indiana, colonel miller.
third brigade (general johnson).-forty-ninth ohio, colonel gibson;
fifteenth ohio, colonel dickey; thirty-fourth illinois, colonel
king; thirty-second indiana, colonel willach.
fourth brigade (general negley).-seventy-seventh pennsylvania,
colonel hambright; seventy-eighth pennsylvania, colonel sinnell;
seventy-ninth pennsylvania, colonel stambaugh; battery, captain
mueller.
camp dick robinson (general g. h. thomas).—-kentucky, colonel
bramlette;—kentucky, colonel fry;—kentucky cavalry,
colonel woolford; fourteenth ohio, colonel steadman; first
artillery, colonel barnett; third ohio, colonel carter;—east
tennessee, colonel byrd.
bardstown, kentucky.-tenth indiana, colonel manson.
crab orchard.-thirty-third indiana, colonel coburn.
jeffersonville, indiana.-thirty-fourth indiana, colonel steele;
thirty-sixth indiana, colonel gross; first wisconsin, colonel
starkweather.
mouth of salt river.-ninth michigan, colonel duffield;
thirty-seventh indiana, colonel hazzard.
lebanon junction..-second minnesota, colonel van cleve.
olympian springs.-second ohio, colonel harris.
cynthiana, kentucky.-thirty-fifth ohio, colonel vandever.
nicholasville, kentucky.-twenty-first ohio, colonel norton;
thirty-eighth ohio, colonel bradley.
big hill.-seventeenth ohio, colonel connell.
colesburg.-twenty-fourth illinois, colonel hecker.
elizabethtown, kentucky.-nineteenth illinois, colonel
turchin.
owensboro' or henderson.-thirty-first indiana, colonel cruft;
colonel edwards, forming rock castle; colonel boyle, harrodsburg;
colonel barney, irvine; colonel hazzard, burksville; colonel
haskins, somerset.
and, in order to conclude this subject, i also add copies of two
telegraphic dispatches, sent for general mcclellan's use about the
same time, which are all the official letters received at his
headquarters, as certified by the adjutant-general, l. thomas, in a
letter of february , ; in answer to an application of my
brother, senator john sherman, and on which i was adjudged
insane:
louisville, november ,  p.m.
to general mclellan, washington, d. c.:
dispatch just received. we are forced to operate on three lines,
all dependent on railroads of doubtful safety, requiring strong
guards. from paris to prestonbnrg, three ohio regiments and some
militia—enemy variously reported from thirty-five hundred to
seven thousand. from lexington toward cumberland gap,
brigadier-general thomas, one indiana and five ohio regiments, two
kentucky and two tennessee; hired wagons and badly clad.
zollicoffer, at cumberland ford, about seven thousand. lee reported
on the way with virginia reenforcements. in front of louisville,
fifty-two miles, mccook, with four brigades of about thirteen
thousand, with four regiments to guard the railroad, at all times
in danger. enemy along the railroad from green river to bowling
green, nashville, and clarksville. buckner, hardee, sidney
johnston, folk, and pillow, the two former in immediate command,
the force as large as they want or can subsist, from twenty-five to
thirty thousand. bowling green strongly fortified. our forces too
small to do good, and too large to sacrifice.
w. t. sherman, brigadier-general.
headquarters the department of the cumberland, louisville,
kentucky, november , 
general l. thomas, adjutant-general.
sir: general mcclellan telegraphs me to report to him daily the
situation of affairs here. the country is so large that it is
impossible to give clear and definite views. our enemies have a
terrible advantage in the fact that in our midst, in our camps, and
along our avenues of travel, they have active partisans, farmers
and business-men, who seemingly pursue their usual calling, but are
in fact spies. they report all our movements and strength, while we
can procure information only by circuitous and unreliable means. i
inclose you the copy of an intercepted letter, which is but the
type of others. many men from every part of the state are now
enrolled under buckner—have gone to him—while ours have
to be raised in neighborhoods, and cannot be called together except
at long notice. these volunteers are being organized under the laws
of the state, and the th of november is fixed for the time of
consolidating them into companies and regiments. many of them are
armed by the united states as home guards, and many by general
anderson and myself, because of the necessity of being armed to
guard their camps against internal enemies. should we be
overwhelmed, they would scatter, and their arms and clothing will
go to the enemy, furnishing the very material they so much need. we
should have here a very large force, sufficient to give confidence
to the union men of the ability to do what should be
done—possess ourselves of all the state. but all see and feel
we are brought to a stand-still, and this produces doubt and alarm.
with our present force it would be simple madness to cross green
river, and yet hesitation may be as fatal. in like manner the other
columns are in peril, not so much in front as rear, the railroads
over which our stores must pass being much exposed. i have the
nashville railroad guarded by three regiments, yet it is far from
being safe; and, the moment actual hostilities commence, these
roads will be interrupted, and we will be in a dilemma. to meet
this in part i have put a cargo of provisions at the mouth of salt
river, guarded by two regiments. all these detachments weaken the
main force, and endanger the whole. do not conclude, as before,
that i exaggerate the facts. they are as stated, and the future
looks as dark as possible. it would be better if some man of
sanguine mind were here, for i am forced to order according to my
convictions.
yours truly,
w. t. sherman, brigadier-general commanding.
after the war was over, general thomas j. wood, then in command
of the district of vicksburg, prepared a statement addressed to the
public, describing the interview with the secretary of war, which
he calls a "council of war." i did not then deem it necessary to
renew a matter which had been swept into oblivion by the war
itself; but, as it is evidence by an eyewitness, it is worthy of
insertion here.
on the th of october, , the writer, who had been personally
on mustering duty in indiana, was appointed a brigadier-general of
volunteers, and ordered to report to general sherman, then in
command of the department of the cumberland, with his headquarters
at louisville, having succeeded general robert anderson. when the
writer was about leaving indianapolis to proceed to louisville, mr.
cameron, returning from his famous visit of inspection to general
fremont's department, at st. louis, missouri, arrived at
indianapolis, and announced his intention to visit general
sherman.
the writer was invited to accompany the party to louisville. taking
the early morning train from indianapolis to louisville on the th
of october, , the party arrived in jeffersonville shortly after
mid-day. general sherman met the party in jeffersonville, and
accompanied it to the galt house, in louisville, the hotel at which
he was stopping.
during the afternoon general sherman informed the writer that a
council of war was to be held immediately in his private room in
the hotel, and desired him to be present at the council. general
sherman and the writer proceeded directly to the room. the writer
entered the room first, and observed in it mr. cameron,
adjutant-general l. thomas, and some other persons, all of whose
names he did not know, but whom he recognized as being of mr.
cameron's party. the name of one of the party the writer had
learned, which he remembers as wilkinson, or wilkerson, and who he
understood was a writer for the new york tribune newspaper. the
hon. james guthrie was also in the room, having been invited, on
account of his eminent position as a citizen of kentucky, his high
civic reputation, and his well-known devotion to the union, to meet
the secretary of war in the council. when general sherman entered
the room he closed the door, and turned the key in the lock.
before entering on the business of the meeting, general sherman
remarked substantially: "mr. cameron, we have met here to discuss
matters and interchange views which should be known only by persons
high in the confidence of the government. there are persons present
whom i do not know, and i desire to know, before opening the
business of the council, whether they are persons who may be
properly allowed to hear the views which i have to submit to you."
mr. cameron replied, with some little testiness of manner, that the
persons referred to belonged to his party, and there was no
objection to their knowing whatever might be communicated to
him.
certainly the legitimate and natural conclusion from this remark of
mr. cameron's was that whatever views might be submitted by general
sherman would be considered under the protection of the seal of
secrecy, and would not be divulged to the public till all
apprehension of injurious consequences from such disclosure had
passed. and it may be remarked, further, that justice to general
sherman required that if, at any future time, his conclusions as to
the amount of force necessary to conduct the operations committed
to his charge should be made public, the grounds on which his
conclusions were based should be made public at the same
time.
mr. cameron then asked general sherman what his plans were. to this
general sherman replied that he had no plans; that no sufficient
force had been placed at his disposition with which to devise any
plan of operations; that, before a commanding general could project
a plan of campaign, he must know what amount of force he would have
to operate with.
the general added that he had views which he would be happy to
submit for the consideration of the secretary. mr. cameron desired
to hear general sherman's views.
general sherman began by giving his opinion of the people of
kentucky, and the then condition of the state. he remarked that he
believed a very large majority of the people of kentucky were
thoroughly devoted to the union, and loyal to the government, and
that the unionists embraced almost all the older and more
substantial men in the state; but, unfortunately, there was no
organization nor arms among the union men; that the rebel minority,
thoroughly vindictive in its sentiments, was organized and armed
(this having been done in advance by their leaders), and, beyond
the reach of the federal forces, overawed and prevented the union
men from organizing; that, in his opinion, if federal protection
were extended throughout the state to the union men, a large force
could be raised for the service of the government.
general sherman next presented a resume of the information in his
possession as to the number of the rebel troops in kentucky.
commencing with the force at columbus, kentucky, the reports
varied, giving the strength from ten to twenty thousand. it was
commanded by lieutenant-general polk. general sherman fixed it at
the lowest estimate; say, ten thousand. the force at bowling green,
commanded by general. a. s. johnston, supported by hardee, buckner,
and others, was variously estimated at from eighteen to thirty
thousand. general sherman estimated this force at the lowest
figures given to it by his information—eighteen
thousand.
he explained that, for purposes of defense, these two forces ought,
owing to the facility with which troops might be transported from
one to the other, by the net-work of railroads in middle and west
tennessee, to be considered almost as one. general sherman
remarked, also, on the facility with which reinforcements could be
transported by railroad to bowling green, from the other rebellions
states.
the third organized body of rebel troops was in eastern kentucky,
under general zollicoffer, estimated, according to the most
reliable information, at six thousand men. this force threatened a
descent, if unrestrained, on the blue-grass region of kentucky,
including the cities of lexington, and frankfort, the capital of
the state; and if successful in its primary movements, as it would
gather head as it advanced, might endanger the safety of
cincinnati.
general sherman said that the information in his possession
indicated an intention, on the part of the rebels, of a general and
grand advance toward the ohio river. he further expressed the
opinion that, if such advance should be made, and not checked, the
rebel force would be swollen by at least twenty thousand recruits
from the disloyalists in kentucky. his low computation of the
organized rebel soldiers then in kentucky fixed the strength at
about thirty-five thousand. add twenty thousand for reenforcements
gained in kentucky, to say nothing of troops drawn from other rebel
states, and the effective rebel force in the state, at a low
estimate, would be fifty-five thousand men.
general sherman explained forcibly how largely the difficulties of
suppressing the rebellion would be enhanced, if the rebels should
be allowed to plant themselves firmly, with strong fortifications,
at commanding points on the ohio river. it would be facile for them
to carry the war thence into the loyal states north of the
river.
to resist an advance of the rebels, general sherman stated that he
did not have at that time in kentucky more than some twelve to
fourteen thousand effective men. the bulk of this force was posted
at camp nolin, on the louisville & nashville railway, fifty
miles south of louisville. a part of it was in eastern kentucky,
under general george h. thomas, and a very small force was in the
lower valley of green river.
this disposition of the force had been made for the double purpose
of watching and checking the rebels, and protecting the raising and
organization of troops among the union men of kentucky.
having explained the situation from the defensive point of view,
general sherman proceeded to consider it from the offensive
stand-point. the government had undertaken to suppress the
rebellion; the onus faciendi, therefore, rested on the government.
the rebellion could never be put down, the authority of the
paramount government asserted, and the union of the states declared
perpetual, by force of arms, by maintaining the defensive; to
accomplish these grand desiderata, it was absolutely necessary the
government should adopt, and maintain until the rebellion was
crushed, the offensive.
for the purpose of expelling the rebels from kentucky, general
sherman said that at least sixty thousand soldiers were necessary.
considering that the means of accomplishment must always be
proportioned to the end to be achieved, and bearing in mind the
array of rebel force then in kentucky, every sensible man must
admit that the estimate of the force given by general sherman, for
driving the rebels out of the state, and reestablishing and
maintaining the authority of the government, was a very low one.
the truth is that, before the rebels were driven from kentucky,
many more than sixty thousand soldiers were sent into the
state.
ascending from the consideration of the narrow question of the
political and military situation in kentucky, and the extent of
force necessary to redeem the state from rebel thraldom,
forecasting in his sagacious intellect the grand and daring
operations which, three years afterward, he realized in a campaign,
taken in its entirety, without a parallel in modern times, general
sherman expressed the opinion that, to carry the war to the gulf of
mexico, and destroy all armed opposition to the goverment, in the
entire mississippi valley, at least two hundred thousand troops
were absolutely requisite.
so soon as general sherman had concluded the expression of his
views, mr. cameron asked, with much warmth and apparent irritation,
"where do you suppose, general sherman, all this force is to come
from." general sherman replied that he did not know; that it was
not his duty to raise, organize, and put the necessary military
force into the field; that duty pertained to the war department.
his duty was to organize campaigns and command the troops after
they had been put into the field.
at this point of the proceedings, general sherman suggested that it
might be agreeable to the secretary to hear the views of mr.
guthrie. thus appealed to, mr. guthrie said he did not consider
himself, being a civilian, competent to give an opinion as to the
extent of force necessary to parry the war to the gulf of mexico;
but, being well informed of the condition of things in kentucky, he
indorsed fully general sherman's opinion of the force required to
drive the rebels out of the state.
the foregoing is a circumstantial account of the deliberations of
the council that were of any importance.
a good deal of desultory conversation followed, on immaterial
matters; and some orders were issued by telegraph, by the secretary
of war, for some small reenforcements to be sent to kentucky
immediately, from pennsylvania and indiana.
a short time after the council was held—the exact time is not
now remembered by the writer—an imperfect narrative of it
appeared in the new york tribune. this account announced to the
public the conclusions uttered by general sherman in the council,
without giving the reasons on which his conclusions were based. the
unfairness of this course to general sherman needs no comment. all
military men were shocked by the gross breach of faith which had
been committed.
th. j. wood, major-general volunteers
vicksburg, mississippi, august , .
brigadier-general don carlos buell arrived at louisville about
the middle of november, with orders to relieve me, and i was
transferred for duty to the department of the missouri, and ordered
to report in person to major-general h. w. halleck at st. louis. i
accompanied general buell to the camp at nolin, where he reviewed
and inspected the camp and troops under the command of general a.
mcd. mccook, and on our way back general buell inspected the
regiment of hazzard at elizabethtown. i then turned over my command
to him, and took my departure for st. louis.
at the time i was so relieved i thought, of course, it was done
in fulfillment of mr. lincoln's promise to me, and as a necessary
result of my repeated demand for the fulfillment of that promise;
but i saw and felt, and was of course deeply moved to observe, the
manifest belief that there was more or less of truth in the rumor
that the cares, perplexities, and anxiety of the situation had
unbalanced my judgment and mind. it was, doubtless, an incident
common to all civil wars, to which i could only submit with the
best grace possible, trusting to the future for an opportunity to
redeem my fortune and good name. of course i could not deny the
fact, and had to submit to all its painful consequences for months;
and, moreover, i could not hide from myself that many of the
officers and soldiers subsequently placed under my command looked
at me askance and with suspicion. indeed, it was not until the
following april that the battle of shiloh gave me personally the
chance to redeem my good name.
on reaching st. louis and reporting to general halleck, i was
received kindly, and was shortly afterward (viz., november d)
sent up to sedalia to inspect the camp there, and the troops
located along the road back to jefferson city, and i was ordered to
assume command in a certain contingency. i found general steels at
sedalia with his regiments scattered about loosely; and general
pope at otterville, twenty miles back, with no concert between
them. the rebel general, sterling price, had his forces down about
osceola and warsaw. i advised general halleck to collect the whole
of his men into one camp on the la mine river, near georgetown, to
put them into brigades and divisions, so as to be ready to be
handled, and i gave some preliminary orders looking to that end.
but the newspapers kept harping on my insanity and paralyzed my
efforts. in spite of myself, they tortured from me some words and
acts of imprudence. general halleck telegraphed me on november
th: "unless telegraph-lines are interrupted, make no movement of
troops without orders;" and on november th: "no forward movement
of troops on osceola will be made; only strong
reconnoitring-parties will be sent out in the supposed direction of
the enemy; the bulk of the troops being held in position till more
reliable information is obtained."
about the same time i received the following dispatch:
november , . brigadier general sherman, sedalia:
mrs. sherman is here. general halleck is satisfied, from reports of
scouts received here, that no attack on sedalia is intended. you
will therefore return to this city, and report your observations on
the condition of the troops you have examined. please telegraph
when you will leave.
schuyler hamilton, brigadier-general and aide-de-camp.
i accordingly returned to st. louis, where i found mrs. sherman,
naturally and properly distressed at the continued and reiterated
reports of the newspapers of my insanity, and she had come from
lancaster to see me. this recall from sedalia simply swelled the
cry. it was alleged that i was recalled by reason of something
foolish i had done at sedalia, though in fact i had done absolutely
nothing, except to recommend what was done immediately thereafter
on the advice of colonel mcpherson, on a subsequent inspection.
seeing and realizing that my efforts were useless, i concluded to
ask for a twenty days' leave of absence, to accompany mrs. sherman
to our home in lancaster, and to allow the storm to blow over
somewhat. it also happened to be mid-winter, when, nothing was
doing; so mrs. sherman and i returned to lancaster, where i was
born, and where i supposed i was better known and appreciated.
the newspapers kept up their game as though instigated by
malice, and chief among them was the cincinnati commercial, whose
editor, halsted, was generally believed to be an honorable man. p.
b. ewing, esq., being in cincinnati, saw him and asked him why he,
who certainly knew better, would reiterate such a damaging slander.
he answered, quite cavalierly, that it was one of the news-items of
the day, and he had to keep up with the time; but he would be most
happy to publish any correction i might make, as though i could
deny such a malicious piece of scandal affecting myself. on the
th of november i had occasion to write to general halleck, and i
have a copy of his letter in answer:
st. louis, december , .
brigadier-general w. t. sherman, lancaster, ohio.
my dear general: yours of the th was received a day or two ago,
but was mislaid for the moment among private papers, or i should
have answered it sooner. the newspaper attacks are certainly
shameless and scandalous, but i cannot agree with you, that they
have us in their power "to destroy us as they please." i certainly
get my share of abuse, but it will not disturb me.
your movement of the troops was not countermanded by me because i
thought it an unwise one in itself, but because i was not then
ready for it. i had better information of price's movements than
you had, and i had no apprehension of an attack. i intended to
concentrate the forces on that line, but i wished the movement
delayed until i could determine on a better position.
after receiving lieutenant-colonel mcpherson's report, i made
precisely the location you had ordered. i was desirous at the time
not to prevent the advance of price by any movement on our part,
hoping that he would move on lexington; but finding that he had
determined to remain at osceola for some time at least, i made the
movement you proposed. as you could not know my plans, you and
others may have misconstrued the reason of my countermanding your
orders....
i hope to see you well enough for duty soon. our organization goes
on slowly, but we will effect it in time. yours truly,
and subsequently, in a letter to hon. thomas ewing, in answer to
some inquiries involving the same general subject, general halleck
wrote as follows:
hon. thomas ewing, lancaster, ohio.
dear sir: your note of the th, and one of this date, from mr.
sherman, in relation to brigadier-general sherman's having being
relieved from command in sedalia, in november last, are just
received. general sherman was not put in command at sedalia; he was
authorized to assume it, and did so for a day or two. he did not
know my plans, and his movement of troops did not accord with them.
i therefore directed him to leave them as they were, and report
here the result of his inspection, for which purpose he had been
ordered there.
no telegram or dispatch of any kind was sent by me, or by any one
with my knowledge or authority, in relation to it. after his return
here, i gave him a leave of absence of twenty days, for the benefit
of his health. as i was then pressing general mcclellan for more
officers, i deemed it necessary to explain why i did so. i used
these words: "i am satisfied that general sherman's physical and
mental system is so completely broken by labor and care as to
render him, for the present, unfit for duty; perhaps a few weeks'
rest may restore him." this was the only communication i made on
the subject. on no occasion have i ever expressed an opinion that
his mind was affected otherwise than by over-exertion; to have said
so would have done him the greatest injustice.
after general sherman returned from his short leave, i found that
his health was nearly restored, and i placed him temporarily in
command of the camp of instruction, numbering over fifteen thousand
men. i then wrote to general mcclellan that he would soon be able
to again take the field. i gave general sherman a copy of my
letter. this is the total of my correspondence on the subject. as
evidence that i have every confidence in general sherman, i have
placed him in command of western kentucky—a command only
second in importance in this department. as soon as divisions and
columns can be organized, i propose to send him into the field
where he can render most efficient service. i have seen newspaper
squibs, charging him with being "crazy," etc. this is the grossest
injustice; i do not, however, consider such attacks worthy of
notice. the best answer is general sherman's present position, and
the valuable services he is rendering to the country. i have the
fullest confidence in him.
very respectfully, your obedient servant,
h. w. halleck, major-general.
on returning to st. louis, on the expiration of my leave of
absence, i found that general halleck was beginning to move his
troops: one part, under general u. s. grant, up the tennessee
river; and another part, under general s. r. curtis, in the
direction of springfield, missouri. general grant was then at
paducah, and general curtis was under orders for rolls. i was
ordered to take curtis's place in command of the camp of
instruction, at benton barracks, on the ground back of north st.
louis, now used as the fair grounds, by the following order:
[special order no. ].
st. louis, december , 
brigadier-general w. t. sherman, united states volunteers, is
hereby assigned to the command of the camp of instruction and post
of benton barracks. he will have every armed regiment and company
in his command ready for service at a moment's warning, and will
notify all concerned that, when marching orders are received, it is
expected that they will be instantly obeyed; no excuses for delay
will be admitted. general sherman will immediately report to these
headquarters what regiments and companies, at benton barracks, are
ready for the field.
by order of major-general halleck,
j. c. kelten, assistant adjutant-general.
i immediately assumed command, and found, in the building
constructed for the commanding officer, brigadier-general strong,
and the family of a captain of iowa cavalry, with whom we boarded.
major curtis, son of general curtis, was the adjutant-general, but
was soon relieved by captain j. h. hammond, who was appointed
assistant adjutant-general, and assigned to duty with me.
brigadier-general hurlbut was also there, and about a dozen
regiments of infantry and cavalry. i at once gave all matters
pertaining to the post my personal attention, got the regiments in
as good order as possible, kept up communication with general
halleck's headquarters by telegraph, and, when orders came for the
movement of any regiment or detachment, it moved instantly. the
winter was very wet, and the ground badly drained. the quarters had
been erected by general fremont, under contract; they were mere
shells, but well arranged for a camp, embracing the fair grounds,
and some forty acres of flat ground west of it. i instituted
drills, and was specially ordered by general halleck to watch
generals hurlbut and strong, and report as to their fitness for
their commissions as brigadier-generals. i had known hurlbut as a
young lawyer, in charleston, south carolina, before the mexican
war, at which time he took a special interest in military matters,
and i found him far above the average in the knowledge of
regimental and brigade drill, and so reported. general strong had
been a merchant, and he told me that he never professed to be a
soldier, but had been urged on the secretary of war for the
commission of a brigadier-general, with the expectation of be
coming quartermaster or commissary-general. he was a good,
kind-hearted gentleman, boiling over with patriotism and zeal. i
advised him what to read and study, was considerably amused at his
receiving instruction from a young lieutenant who knew the company
and battalion drill, and could hear him practise in his room the
words of command, and tone of voice, "break from the right, to
march to the left!" "battalion, halt!" "forward into line!" etc. of
course i made a favorable report in his case. among the infantry
and cavalry colonels were some who afterward rose to
distinction—david stuart, gordon granger, bussey, etc.,
etc.
though it was mid-winter, general halleck was pushing his
preparations most vigorously, and surely he brought order out of
chaos in st. louis with commendable energy. i remember, one night,
sitting in his room, on the second floor of the planters' house,
with him and general cullum, his chief of staff, talking of things
generally, and the subject then was of the much-talked-of
"advance," as soon as the season would permit. most people urged
the movement down the mississippi river; but generals polk and
pillow had a large rebel force, with heavy guns in a very strong
position, at columbus, kentucky, about eighteen miles below cairo.
commodore foote had his gunboat fleet at cairo; and general u. s.
grant, who commanded the district, was collecting a large force at
paducah, cairo, and bird's point. general halleck had a map on his
table, with a large pencil in his hand, and asked, "where is the
rebel line?" cullum drew the pencil through bowling green, forts
donelson and henry, and columbus, kentucky. "that is their line,"
said halleck. "now, where is the proper place to break it?" and
either cullum or i said, "naturally the centre." halleck drew a
line perpendicular to the other, near its middle, and it coincided
nearly with the general course of the tennessee river; and he said,
"that's the true line of operations." this occurred more than a
month before general grant began the movement, and, as he was
subject to general halleck's orders, i have always given halleck
the full credit for that movement, which was skillful, successful,
and extremely rich in military results; indeed, it was the first
real success on our side in the civil war. the movement up the
tennessee began about the st of february, and fort henry was
captured by the joint action of the navy under commodore foote, and
the land forces under general grant, on the th of february, .
about the same time, general s. r. curtis had moved forward from
rolls, and, on the th of march, defeated the rebels under
mcculloch, van dom, and price, at pea ridge.
as soon as fort henry fell, general grant marched straight
across to fort donelson, on the cumberland river, invested the
place, and, as soon as the gunboats had come round from the
tennessee, and had bombarded the water-front, he assaulted;
whereupon buckner surrendered the garrison of twelve thousand men;
pillow and ex-secretary of war general floyd having personally
escaped across the river at night, occasioning a good deal of fun
and criticism at their expense.
before the fall of donelson, but after that of henry, i
received, at benton barracks, the following orders:
st. louis, february , 
brigadier-general sherman, benton barracks:
you will immediately repair to paducah, kentucky, and assume
command of that post. brigadier-general hurlbut will accompany you.
the command of benton barracks will be turned over to general
strong.
h. w. haleck, major-general.
i started for paducah the same day, and think that general
cullum went with me to cairo; general halleck's purpose being to
push forward the operations up the tennessee river with unusual
vigor. on reaching paducah, i found this dispatch:
st. louis, february , 
brigadier-general sherman, paducah, kentucky:
send general grant every thing you can spare from paducah and smith
and also general hurlbut.
bowling green has been evacuated entirely.
h. w. halleck, major-general.
the next day brought us news of the surrender of buckner, and
probably at no time during the war did we all feel so heavy a
weight raised from our breasts, or so thankful for a most fruitful
series of victories. they at once gave generals halleck, grant, and
c. f. smith, great fame. of course, the rebels let go their whole
line, and fell back on nashville and island no. ten, and to the
memphis & charleston railroad. everybody was anxious to help.
boats passed up and down constantly, and very soon arrived the
rebel prisoners from donelson. i saw general buckner on the boat,
he seemed self-sufficient, and thought their loss was not really so
serious to their cause as we did.
about this time another force of twenty or twenty-five thousand
men was collected on the west bank of the mississippi, above cairo,
under the command of major-general john pope, designed to become
the "army of the mississippi," and to operate, in conjunction with
the navy, down the river against the enemy's left flank, which had
held the strong post of columbus, kentucky, but which, on the fall
of fort donelson, had fallen back to new madrid and island no.
battle of shiloh.
by the end of february, , major-general halleck commanded
all the armies in the valley of the mississippi, from his
headquarters in st: louis. these were, the army of the ohio,
major-general buell, in kentucky; the army of the tennessee,
major-general grant, at forts henry and donelson; the army of the
mississippi, major-general pope; and that of general s. r. curtis,
in southwest missouri. he posted his chief of staff, general
cullum, at cairo, and me at paducah, chiefly to expedite and
facilitate the important operations then in progress up the
tennessee, and cumberland rivers.
fort donelson had surrendered to general grant on the th of
february, and there must have been a good deal of confusion
resulting from the necessary care of the wounded, and disposition
of prisoners, common to all such occasions, and there was a real
difficulty in communicating between st. louis and fort
donelson.
general buell had also followed up the rebel army, which had
retreated hastily from bowling green to and through nashville, a
city of so much importance to the south, that it was at one time
proposed as its capital. both generals grant and buell looked to
its capture as an event of great importance. on the st general
grant sent general smith with his division to clarksville, fifty
miles above donelson, toward nashville, and on the th went
himself to nashville to meet and confer with general buell, but
returned to donelson the next day.
meantime, general halleck at st. louis must have felt that his
armies were getting away from him, and began to send dispatches to
me at paducah, to be forwarded by boat, or by a rickety
telegraph-line up to fort henry, which lay entirely in a hostile
country, and was consequently always out of repair. on the st of
march i received the following dispatch, and forwarded it to
general grant, both by the telegraph and boat:
to general grant, fort henry
transports will be sent you as soon as possible, to move your
column up the tennessee river. the main object of this expedition
will be to destroy the railroad-bridge over bear creek, near
eastport, mississippi; and also the railroad connections at
corinth, jackson, and humboldt. it is thought best that these
objects be attempted in the order named. strong detachments of
cavalry and light artillery, supported by infantry, may by rapid
movements reach these points from the river, without any serious
opposition.
avoid any general engagements with strong forces. it will be better
to retreat than to risk a general battle. this should be strongly
impressed on the officers sent with expeditions from the river.
general c. f. smith or some very discreet officer should be
selected for such commands. having accomplished these objects, or
such of them as may be practicable, you will return to danville,
and move on paris.
perhaps the troops sent to jackson and humbolt can reach paris by
land as easily as to return to the transports. this must depend on
the character of the roads and the position of the enemy. all
telegraphic lines which can be reached must be cut. the gunboats
will accompany the transports for their protection. any loyal
tennesseeans who desire it, may be enlisted and supplied with arms.
competent officers should be left to command forts henry and
donelson in your absence. i have indicated in general terms the
object of this.
h. w. halleck, major-general.
again on the d:
cairo, march , 
to general grant:
general halleck, february th, telegraphs me: "general grant will
send no more forces to clarksville. general smith's division will
come to fort henry, or a point higher up on the tennessee river;
transports will also be collected at paducah. two gunboats in
tennessee river with grant. general grant will immediately have
small garrisons detailed for forts henry and donelson, and all
other forces made ready for the field."
from your letter of the th, i learn you were at fort donelson,
and general smith at nashville, from which i infer you could not
have received orders. halleck's telegram of last night says: "who
sent smith's division to nashville? i ordered it across to the
tennessee, where they are wanted immediately. order them back. send
all spare transports up tennessee to general grant." evidently the
general supposes you to be on the tennessee. i am sending all the
transports i can find for you, reporting to general sherman for
orders to go up the cumberland for you, or, if you march across to
fort henry, then to send them up the tennessee.
g. w. cullum, brigadier-general.
on the th came this dispatch:
to major-general u. s. grant
you will place major-general c. f. smith in command of expedition,
and remain yourself at fort henry. why do you not obey my orders to
report strength and positions of your command?
h. w. halleck, major-general.
halleck was evidently working himself into a passion, but he was
too far from the seat of war to make due allowance for the actual
state of facts. general grant had done so much, that general
halleck should have been patient. meantime, at paducah, i was busy
sending boats in every direction—some under the orders of
general halleck, others of general cullum; others for general
grant, and still others for general buell at nashville; and at the
same time i was organizing out of the new troops that were arriving
at paducah a division for myself when allowed to take the field,
which i had been promised by general halleck. his purpose was
evidently to operate up the tennessee river, to break up bear creek
bridge and the railroad communications between the mississippi and
tennessee rivers, and no doubt he was provoked that generals grant
and smith had turned aside to nashville. in the mean time several
of the gunboats, under captain phelps, united states navy, had gone
up the tennessee as far as florence, and on their return had
reported a strong union feeling among the people along the river.
on the th of march, having received the necessary orders from
general halleck, i embarked my division at paducah. it was composed
of four brigades. the first, commanded by colonel s. g. hicks, was
composed of the fortieth illinois, forty-sixth ohio, and morton's
indiana battery, on the boats sallie list, golden gate, j. b.
adams, and lancaster.
the second brigade, colonel d. stuart, was composed of the
fifty-fifth illinois, seventy-first ohio, and fifty-fourth ohio;
embarked on the hannibal, universe, hazel dell, cheeseman, and
prairie rose.
the third brigade, colonel hildebrand, was composed of the
seventy-seventh ohio, fifty-seventh ohio, and fifty-third ohio;
embarked on the poland, anglo-saxon, ohio no. three, and
continental.
the fourth brigade, colonel buckland, was composed of the
seventy-second ohio, forty-eighth ohio, and seventieth ohio;
embarked on the empress, baltic, shenango, and marrengo.
we steamed up to fort henry, the river being high and in
splendid order. there i reported in person to general c. f. smith,
and by him was ordered a few miles above, to the remains of the
burned railroad bridge, to await the rendezvous of the rest of his
army. i had my headquarters on the continental.
among my colonels i had a strange character—thomas
worthington, colonel of the forty-sixth ohio. he was a graduate of
west point, of the class of ; was, therefore, older than
general halleck, general grant, or myself, and claimed to know more
of war than all of us put together. in ascending the river he did
not keep his place in the column, but pushed on and reached
savannah a day before the rest of my division. when i reached that
place, i found that worthington had landed his regiment, and was
flying about giving orders, as though he were commander-in-chief. i
made him get back to his boat, and gave him to understand that he
must thereafter keep his place. general c. f. smith arrived about
the th of march, with a large fleet of boats, containing
hurlbut's division, lew. wallace's division, and that of himself,
then commanded by brigadier-general w. h. l. wallace.
general smith sent for me to meet him on his boat, and ordered
me to push on under escort of the two gunboats, lexington and
tyler, commanded by captains gwin and shirk, united states navy. i
was to land at some point below eastport, and make a break of the
memphis & charleston railroad, between tuscumbia and corinth.
general smith was quite unwell, and was suffering from his leg,
which was swollen and very sore, from a mere abrasion in stepping
into a small boat. this actually mortified, and resulted in his
death about a month after, viz., april , . he was adjutant of
the military academy during the early part of my career there, and
afterward commandant of cadets. he was a very handsome and
soldierly man, of great experience, and at donelson had acted with
so much personal bravery that to him many attributed the success of
the assault.
i immediately steamed up the tennessee river, following the two
gunboats, and, in passing pittsburg landing, was told by captain
gwin that, on his former trip up the river, he had found a rebel
regiment of cavalry posted there, and that it was the usual
landing-place for the people about corinth, distant thirty miles. i
sent word back to general smith that, if we were detained up the
river, he ought to post some troops at pittsburg landing. we went
on up the river cautiously, till we saw eastport and chickasaw,
both of which were occupied by rebel batteries and a small rebel
force of infantry.
we then dropped back quietly to the mouth of yellow river, a few
miles below, whence led a road to burnsville, a place on the
memphis & charleston road, where were the company's
repair-shops. we at once commenced disembarking the command: first
the cavalry, which started at once for burnsville, with orders to
tear up the railroad-track, and burn the depots, shops, etc; and i
followed with the infantry and artillery as fast as they were
disembarked. it was raining very hard at the time. daylight found
us about six miles out, where we met the cavalry returning. they
had made numerous attempts to cross the streams, which had become
so swollen that mere brooks covered the whole bottom; and my
aide-de-camp, sanger, whom i had dispatched with the cavalry,
reported the loss, by drowning, of several of the men. the rain was
pouring in torrents, and reports from the rear came that the river
was rising very fast, and that, unless we got back to our boats
soon, the bottom would be simply impassable. there was no
alternative but to regain our boats; and even this was so
difficult, that we had to unharness the artillery-horses, and drag
the guns under water through the bayous, to reach the bank of the
river. once more embarked, i concluded to drop down to pittsburg
landing, and to make the attempt from there. during the night of
the th, we dropped down to pittsburg landing, where i found
hurlbut's division in boats. leaving my command there, i steamed
down to savannah, and reported to general smith in person, who saw
in the flooded tennessee the full truth of my report; and he then
instructed me to disembark my own division, and that of general
hurlbut, at pittsburg landing; to take positions well back, and to
leave room for his whole army; telling me that he would soon come
up in person, and move out in force to make the lodgment on the
railroad, contemplated by general halleck's orders.
lieutenant-colonel mcpherson, of general c. f. smith's, or
rather general halleck's, staff, returned with me, and on the th
of march we disembarked and marched out about ten miles toward
corinth, to a place called monterey or pea ridge, where the rebels
had a cavalry regiment, which of course decamped on our approach,
but from the people we learned that trains were bringing large
masses of men from every direction into corinth. mcpherson and i
reconnoitred the ground well, and then returned to our boats. on
the th, hurlbut disembarked his division and took post about a
mile and a half out, near where the roads branched, one leading to
corinth and the other toward hamburg. on the th i disembarked my
division, and took post about three miles back, three of the
brigades covering the roads to purdy and corinth, and the other
brigade (stuart's) temporarily at a place on the hamburg road, near
lick creek ford, where the bark road came into the hamburg road.
within a few days, prentiss's division arrived and camped on my
left, and afterward mcclernand's and w. h. l. wallace's divisions,
which formed a line to our rear. lew wallace's division remained on
the north side of snake creek, on a road leading from savannah or
cramp's landing to purdy.
general c. f. smith remained back at savannah, in chief command,
and i was only responsible for my own division. i kept pickets well
out on the roads, and made myself familiar with all the ground
inside and outside my lines. my personal staff was composed of
captain j. h. hammond, assistant adjutant-general; surgeons
hartshorn and l'hommedieu; lieutenant colonels hascall and sanger,
inspector-generals; lieutenants mccoy and john taylor,
aides-de-camp. we were all conscious that the enemy was collecting
at corinth, but in what force we could not know, nor did we know
what was going on behind us. on the th of march, general u. s.
grant was restored to the command of all the troops up the
tennessee river, by reason of general smith's extreme illness, and
because he had explained to general halleck satisfactorily his
conduct after donelson; and he too made his headquarters at
savannah, but frequently visited our camps. i always acted on the
supposition that we were an invading army; that our purpose was to
move forward in force, make a lodgment on the memphis &
charleston road, and thus repeat the grand tactics of fort
donelson, by separating the rebels in the interior from those at
memphis and on the mississippi river. we did not fortify our camps
against an attack, because we had no orders to do so, and because
such a course would have made our raw men timid. the position was
naturally strong, with snake creek on our right, a deep, bold
stream, with a confluent (owl creek) to our right front; and lick
creek, with a similar confluent, on our left, thus narrowing the
space over which we could be attacked to about a mile and a half or
two miles.
at a later period of the war, we could have rendered this
position impregnable in one night, but at this time we did not do
it, and it may be it is well we did not. from about the st of
april we were conscious that the rebel cavalry in our front was
getting bolder and more saucy; and on friday, the th of april, it
dashed down and carried off one of our picket-guards, composed of
an officer and seven men, posted a couple of miles out on the
corinth road. colonel buckland sent a company to its relief, then
followed himself with a regiment, and, fearing lest he might be
worsted, i called out his whole brigade and followed some four or
five miles, when the cavalry in advance encountered artillery. i
then, after dark, drew back to our lines, and reported the fact by
letter to general grant, at savannah; but thus far we had not
positively detected the presence of infantry, for cavalry regiments
generally had a couple of guns along, and i supposed the guns that
opened on the on the evening of friday, april th, belonged to the
cavalry that was hovering along our whole front.
saturday passed in our camps without any unusual event, the
weather being wet and mild, and the roads back to the steamboat
landing being heavy with mud; but on sunday morning, the th,
early, there was a good deal of picket-firing, and i got breakfast,
rode out along my lines, and, about four hundred yards to the front
of appler's regiment, received from some bushes in a ravine to the
left front a volley which killed my orderly, holliday. about the
same time i saw the rebel lines of battle in front coming down on
us as far as the eye could reach. all my troops were in line of
battle, ready, and the ground was favorable to us. i gave the
necessary orders to the battery (waterhouse's) attached to
hildebrand's brigade, and cautioned the men to reserve their fire
till the rebels had crossed the ravine of owl creek, and had begun
the ascent; also, sent staff-officers to notify generals mcclernand
and prentiss of the coming blow. indeed, mcclernand had already
sent three regiments to the support of my left flank, and they were
in position when the onset came.
in a few minutes the battle of "shiloh" began with extreme fury,
and lasted two days. its history has been well given, and it has
been made the subject of a great deal of controversy. hildebrand's
brigade was soon knocked to pieces, but buckland's and mcdowell's
kept their organization throughout. stuart's was driven back to the
river, and did not join me in person till the second day of the
battle. i think my several reports of that battle are condensed and
good, made on the spot, when all the names and facts were fresh in
my memory, and are herewith given entire:
pittsburg landing, march , 
captain wm. mcmichael, assistant adjutant-general to general c. f
smith, savannah, tennessee.
sir: last night i dispatched a party of cavalry, at  p.m., under
the command of lieutenant-colonel heath, fifth ohio cavalry, for a
strong reconnoissance, if possible, to be converted into an attack
upon the memphis road. the command got off punctually, followed at
twelve o'clock at night by the first brigade of my division,
commanded by colonel mcdowell, the other brigades to follow in
order.
about one at night the cavalry returned, reporting the road
occupied in force by the enemy, with whose advance-guard they
skirmished, driving them back—about a mile, taking two
prisoners, and having their chief guide, thomas maxwell, esq., and
three men of the fourth illinois wounded.
inclosed please find the report of lieutenant-colonel heath; also a
copy of his instructions, and the order of march. as soon as the
cavalry returned, i saw that an attempt on the road was frustrated,
and accordingly have placed mcdowell's brigade to our right front,
guarding the pass of snake creek; stuart's brigade to the left
front, to watch the pass of lick creek; and i shall this morning
move directly out on the corinth road, about eight miles to or
toward pea ridge, which is a key-point to the southwest.
general hurlbut's division will be landed to-day, and the artillery
and infantry disposed so as to defend pittsburg, leaving my
division entire for any movement by land or water.
as near as i can learn, there are five regiments of rebel infantry
at purdy; at corinth, and distributed along the railroad to inca,
are probably thirty thousand men; but my information from prisoners
is very indistinct. every road and path is occupied by the enemy's
cavalry, whose orders seem to be to fire a volley, retire again,
fire and retire. the force on the purdy road attacked and driven by
major bowman yesterday, was about sixty strong. that encountered
last night on the corinth road was about five companies of
tennessee cavalry, sent from purdy about  p.m. yesterday.
i hear there is a force of two regiments on pea ridge, at the point
where the purdy and corinth roads come together.
i am satisfied we cannot reach the memphis & charleston road
without a considerable engagement, which is prohibited by general
halleck's instructions, so that i will be governed by your orders
of yesterday, to occupy pittsburg strongly, extend the pickets so
as to include a semicircle of three miles, and push a strong
reconnoissance as far out as lick creek and pea ridge.
i will send down a good many boats to-day, to be employed as you
may direct; and would be obliged if you would send a couple of
thousand sacks of corn, as much hay as you can possibly spare, and,
if possible, a barge of coal.
i will send a steamboat under care of the gunboat, to collect corn
from cribs on the river-bank.
i have the honor to be your obedient servant,
brigadier-general, commanding first division.
headquarters, steamboat continental, pittsburg, march ,
captain rawlins, assistant adjutant-general to general grant.
sir: the division surgeon having placed some one hundred or more
sick on board the fanny bullitt, i have permitted her to take them
to savannah. there is neither house nor building of any kind that
can be used for a hospital here.
i hope to receive an order to establish floating hospitals, but in
the mean time, by the advise of the surgeon, allow these sick men
to leave. let me hope that it will meet your approbation.
the order for debarkation came while general sherman was absent
with three brigades, and no men are left to move the effects of
these brigades.
the landing, too, is small, with scarcely any chance to increase
it; therefore there is a great accumulation of boats. colonel
mcarthur has arrived, and is now cutting a landing for
himself.
general sherman will return this evening. i am obliged to
transgress, and write myself in the mean time,
respectfully your obedient servant,
j. h. hammond, assistant adjutant-general.
p. s— p.m.—just back; have been half-way to corinth
and to purdy. all right. have just read this letter, and approve
all but floating hospitals; regimental surgeons can take care of
all sick, except chronic cases, which can always be sent down to
paducah.
magnificent plain for camping and drilling, and a military point of
great strength. the enemy has felt us twice, at great loss and
demoralization; will report at length this evening; am now much
worn out.
w. t. sherman, brigadier-general.
pittsburg landing, march , .
captain rawlins, assistant adjutant-general to general grant,
savannah, tennessee.
sir: i have just returned from an extensive reconnoissance toward
corinth and purdy, and am strongly impressed with the importance of
this position, both for its land advantages and its strategic
position. the ground itself admits of easy defense by a small
command, and yet affords admirable camping-ground for a hundred
thousand men. i will as soon as possible make or cause to be made a
topographical sketch of the position. the only drawback is that, at
this stage of water, the space for landing is contracted too much
for the immense fleet now here discharging.
i will push the loading and unloading of boats, but suggest that
you send at once (captain dodd, if possible) the best quartermaster
you can, that he may control and organize this whole matter. i have
a good commissary, and will keep as few provisions afloat as
possible. yours, etc.,
w. t. sherman, brigadier-general commanding.
camp shiloh, near pittsburg landing, tennessee, april , 
captain j. a. rawlins, assistant adjutant-general to general
sir: in obedience to general grant's instructions of march st,
with one section of captain muench's minnesota battery, two
twelve-pound howitzers, a detachment of fifth ohio cavalry of one
hundred and fifty men, under major ricker, and two battalions of
infantry from the fifty-seventh and seventy-seventh ohio, under the
command of colonels hildebrand and mungen, i marched to the river,
and embarked on the steamers empress and tecumseh. the gunboat
cairo did not arrive at pittsburg, until after midnight, and at 
p.m. captain bryant, commanding the gunboat, notified me that he
was ready to proceed up the river. i followed, keeping the
transports within about three hundred yards of the gunboat. about 
p.m., the cairo commenced shelling the battery above the mouth of
indian creek, but elicited no reply. she proceeded up the river
steadily and cautiously, followed close by the tyler and lexington,
all throwing shells at the points where, on former visits of the
gunboats, enemy's batteries were found. in this order all followed,
till it was demonstrated that all the enemy's batteries, including
that at chickasaw, were abandoned.
i ordered the battalion of infantry under colonel hildebrand to
disembark at eastport, and with the other battalion proceeded to
chickasaw and landed. the battery at this point had evidently been
abandoned some time, and consisted of the remains of an old indian
mound, partly washed away by the river, which had been fashioned
into a two-gun battery, with a small magazine. the ground to its
rear had evidently been overflowed during the late freshet, and led
to the removal of the guns to eastport, where the batteries were on
high, elevated ground, accessible at all seasons from the country
to the rear.
upon personal inspection, i attach little importance to chickasaw
as a military position. the people, who had fled during the
approach of the gunboats, returned to the village, and said the
place had been occupied by one tennessee regiment and a battery of
artillery from pensacola. after remaining at chickasaw some hours,
all the boats dropped back to eastport, not more than a mile below,
and landed there. eastport landing during the late freshet must
have been about twelve feet under water, but at the present stage
the landing is the best i have seen on the tennessee river.
the levee is clear of trees or snags, and a hundred boats could
land there without confusion.
the soil is of sand and gravel, and very firm. the road back is
hard, and at a distance of about four hundred yards from the water
begin the gravel hills of the country. the infantry scouts sent out
by colonel hildebrand found the enemy's cavalry mounted, and
watching the inca road, about two miles back of eastport. the
distance to inca is only eight miles, and inca is the nearest point
and has the best road by which the charleston & memphis
railroad can be reached. i could obtain no certain information as
to the strength of the enemy there, but am satisfied that it would
have been folly to have attempted it with my command. our object
being to dislodge the enemy from the batteries recently erected
near eastport, and this being attained, i have returned, and report
the river to be clear to and beyond chickasaw.
i have the honor to be, your obedient servant,
brigadier-general commanding division.
camp shiloh, april , .
captain j. a. rawlins, assistant adjutant-general, district of
western tennessee.
sir: i have the honor to report that yesterday, about  p.m., the
lieutenant commanding and seven men of the advance pickets
imprudently advanced from their posts and were captured. i ordered
major ricker, of the fifth ohio cavalry, to proceed rapidly to the
picket-station, ascertain the truth, and act according to
circumstances. he reached the station, found the pickets had been
captured as reported, and that a company of infantry sent by the
brigade commander had gone forward in pursuit of some cavalry. he
rapidly advanced some two miles, and found them engaged, charged
the enemy, and drove them along the ridge road, till he met and
received three discharges of artillery, when he very properly
wheeled under cover, and returned till he met me.
as soon as i heard artillery, i advanced with two regiments of
infantry, and took position, and remained until the scattered
companies of infantry and cavalry had returned. this was after
night.
i infer that the enemy is in some considerable force at pea ridge,
that yesterday morning they crossed a brigade of two regiments of
infantry, one regiment of cavalry, and one battery of
field-artillery, to the ridge on which the corinth road lies. they
halted the infantry and artillery at a point abort five miles in my
front, sent a detachment to the lane of general meeks, on the north
of owl creek, and the cavalry down toward our camp. this cavalry
captured a part of our advance pickets, and afterward engaged the
two companies of colonel buckland's regiment, as described by him
in his report herewith inclosed. our cavalry drove them back upon
their artillery and infantry, killing many, and bringing off ten
prisoners, all of the first alabama cavalry, whom i send to
you.
we lost of the pickets one first-lieutenant and seven men of the
ohio seventieth infantry (list inclosed); one major, one
lieutenant, and one private of the seventy-second ohio, taken
prisoners; eight privates wounded (names in full, embraced in
report of colonel buckland, inclosed herewith).
we took ten prisoners, and left two rebels wounded and many killed
on the field.
i have the honor to be, your obedient servant,
brigadier-general, commanding division.
camp shiloh, april , .
captain j. a. rawlins, assistant adjutant-general to general
sir: i had the honor to report that, on friday the th inst., the
enemy's cavalry drove in our pickets, posted about a mile and a
half in advance of my centre, on the main corinth road, capturing
one first-lieutenant and seven men; that i caused a pursuit by the
cavalry of my division, driving them back about five miles, and
killing many. on saturday the enemy's cavalry was again very bold,
coming well down to our front; yet i did not believe they designed
any thing but a strong demonstration. on sunday morning early, the
th inst., the enemy drove our advance-guard back on the main body,
when i ordered under arms all my division, and sent word to general
mcclernand, asking him to support my left; to general prentiss,
giving him notice that the enemy was in our front in force, and to
general hurlbut, asking him to support general prentiss. at that
time— a.m.—my division was arranged as follows:
first brigade, composed of the sixth iowa, colonel j. a.
mcdowell;
fortieth illinois, colonel hicks; forty-sixth ohio, colonel
worthington; and the morton battery, captain behr, on the extreme
right, guarding the bridge on the purdy road over owl creek.
second brigade, composed of the fifty-fifth illinois, colonel d.
stuart; the fifty-fourth ohio, colonel t. kilby smith; and the
seventy-first ohio, colonel mason, on the extreme left, guarding
the ford over lick creek.
third brigade, composed of the seventy-seventh ohio, colonel
hildebrand; the fifty-third ohio, colonel appler; and the
fifty-seventh ohio, colonel mungen, on the left of the corinth
road, its right resting on shiloh meeting-house.
fourth brigade, composed of the seventy-second ohio, colonel
buckland; the forty-eighth ohio, colonel sullivan; and the
seventieth ohio, colonel cookerill, on the right of the corinth
road, its left resting on shiloh meeting-house.
two batteries of artillery—taylor's and
waterhouse's—were posted, the former at shiloh, and the
latter on a ridge to the left, with a front-fire over open ground
between mungen's and appler's regiments. the cavalry, eight
companies of the fourth illinois, under colonel dickey, were posted
in a large open field to the left and rear of shiloh meeting-house,
which i regarded as the centre of my position.
shortly after  a.m., with my entire staff, i rode along a portion
of our front, and when in the open field before appler's regiment,
the enemy's pickets opened a brisk fire upon my party, killing my
orderly, thomas d. holliday, of company h, second illinois cavalry.
the fire came from the bushes which line a small stream that rises
in the field in front of appler's camp, and flows to the north
along my whole front.
this valley afforded the enemy partial cover; but our men were so
posted as to have a good fire at them as they crossed the valley
and ascended the rising ground on our side.
about  a.m. i saw the glistening bayonets of heavy masses of
infantry to our left front in the woods beyond the small stream
alluded to, and became satisfied for the first time that the enemy
designed a determined attack on our whole camp.
all the regiments of my division were then in line of battle at
their proper posts. i rode to colonel appler, and ordered him to
hold his ground at all hazards, as he held the left flank of our
first line of battle, and i informed him that he had a good battery
on his right, and strong support to his rear. general mcclernand
had promptly and energetically responded to my request, and had
sent me three regiments which were posted to protect waterhouse's
battery and the left flank of my line.
the battle opened by the enemy's battery, in the woods to our
front, throwing shells into our camp. taylor's and waterhouse's
batteries promptly responded, and i then observed heavy battalions
of infantry passing obliquely to the left, across the open field in
appler's front; also, other columns advancing directly upon my
division. our infantry and artillery opened along the whole line,
and the battle became general. other heavy masses of the enemy's
forces kept passing across the field to our left, and directing
their course on general prentiss. i saw at once that the enemy
designed to pass my left flank, and fall upon generals mcclernand
and prentiss, whose line of camps was almost parallel with the
tennessee river, and about two miles back from it. very soon the
sound of artillery and musketry announced that general prentiss was
engaged; and about  a. m. i judged that he was falling back. about
this time appler's regiment broke in disorder, followed by mungen's
regiment, and the enemy pressed forward on waterhouse's battery
thereby exposed.
the three illinois regiments in immediate support of this battery
stood for some time; but the enemy's advance was so vigorous, and
the fire so severe, that when colonel raith, of the forty-third
illinois, received a severe wound and fell from his horse, his
regiment and the others manifested disorder, and the enemy got
possession of three guns of this (waterhouse's) battery. although
our left was thus turned, and the enemy was pressing our whole
line, i deemed shiloh so important, that i remained by it and
renewed my orders to colonels mcdowell and buckland to hold their
ground; and we did hold these positions until about  a.m., when
the enemy had got his artillery to the rear of our left flank and
some change became absolutely necessary. two regiments of
hildebrand's brigade—appler's and mungen's—had already
disappeared to the rear, and hildebrand's own regiment was in
disorder. i therefore gave orders for taylor's battery—still
at shiloh—to fall back as far as the purdy and hamburg road,
and for mcdowell and buckland to adopt that road as their new line.
i rode across the angle and met behr's battery at the cross-roads,
and ordered it immediately to come into battery, action right.
captain behr gave the order, but he was almost immediately shot
from his horse, when drivers and gunners fled in disorder, carrying
off the caissons, and abandoning five out of six guns, without
firing a shot. the enemy pressed on, gaining this battery, and we
were again forced to choose a new line of defense. hildebrand's
brigade had substantially disappeared from the field, though he
himself bravely remained. mcdowell's and buckland's brigades
maintained their organizations, and were conducted by my aides, so
as to join on general mcclernand's right, thus abandoning my
original camps and line. this was about  / a.m., at which time
the enemy had made a furious attack on general mcclernand's whole
front. he straggled most determinedly, but, finding him pressed, i
moved mcdowell's brigade directly against the left flank of the
enemy, forced him back some distance, and then directed the men to
avail themselves of every cover-trees, fallen timber, and a wooded
valley to our right. we held this position for four long hours,
sometimes gaining and at others losing ground; general mcclernand
and myself acting in perfect concert, and struggling to maintain
this line. while we were so hard pressed, two iowa regiments
approached from the rear, but could not be brought up to the severe
fire that was raging in our front, and general grant, who visited
us on that ground, will remember our situation about  p.m.; but
about  p.m. it was evident that hurlbut's line had been driven
back to the river; and knowing that general lew wallace was coming
with reinforcements from cramp's landing, general mcclernand and i,
on consultation, selected a new line of defense, with its right
covering a bridge by which general wallace had to approach. we fell
back as well as we could, gathering in addition to our own such
scattered forces as we could find, and formed the new line.
during this change the enemy's cavalry charged us, but were
handsomely repulsed by the twenty-ninth illinois regiment. the
fifth ohio battery, which had come up, rendered good service in
holding the enemy in check for some time, and major taylor also
came up with another battery and got into position, just in time to
get a good flank-fire upon the enemy's column, as he pressed on
general mcclernand's right, checking his advance; when general
mcclernand's division made a fine charge on the enemy and drove him
back into the ravines to our front and right. i had a clear field,
about two hundred yards wide, in my immediate front, and contented
myself with keeping the enemy's infantry at that distance during
the rest of the day. in this position we rested for the
night.
my command had become decidedly of a mixed character. buckland's
brigade was the only one that retained its organization. colonel
hildebrand was personally there, but his brigade was not. colonel
mcdowell had been severely injured by a fall off his horse, and had
gone to the river, and the three regiments of his brigade were not
in line. the thirteenth missouri, colonel crafts j. wright, had
reported to me on the field, and fought well, retaining its
regimental organization; and it formed a part of my line during
sunday night and all monday. other fragments of regiments and
companies had also fallen into my division, and acted with it
during the remainder of the battle. general grant and buell visited
me in our bivouac that evening, and from them i learned the
situation of affairs on other parts of the field. general wallace
arrived from crump's landing shortly after dark, and formed his
line to my right rear. it rained hard during the night, but our men
were in good spirits, lay on their arms, being satisfied with such
bread and meat as could be gathered at the neighboring camps, and
determined to redeem on monday the losses of sunday.
at daylight of monday i received general grant's orders to advance
and recapture our original camps. i dispatched several members of
my staff to bring up all the men they could find, especially the
brigade of colonel stuart, which had been separated from the
division all the day before; and at the appointed time the
division, or rather what remained of it, with the thirteenth
missouri and other fragments, moved forward and reoccupied the
ground on the extreme right of general mcclernand's camp, where we
attracted the fire of a battery located near colonel mcdowell's
former headquarters. here i remained, patiently waiting for the
sound of general buell's advance upon the main corinth road. about
 a.m. the heavy firing in that direction, and its steady
approach, satisfied me; and general wallace being on our right
flank with his well-conducted division, i led the head of my column
to general mcclernand's right, formed line of battle, facing south,
with buckland's brigade directly across the ridge, and stuart's
brigade on its right in the woods; and thus advanced, steadily and
slowly, under a heavy fire of musketry and artillery. taylor had
just got to me from the rear, where he had gone for ammunition, and
brought up three guns, which i ordered into position, to advance by
hand firing. these guns belonged to company a, chicago light
artillery, commanded by lieutenant p. p. wood, and did most
excellent service. under cover of their fire, we advanced till we
reached the point where the corinth road crosses the line of
mcclernand's camp, and here i saw for the first time the
well-ordered and compact columns of general buell's kentucky
forces, whose soldierly movements at once gave confidence to our
newer and less disciplined men. here i saw willich's regiment
advance upon a point of water-oaks and thicket, behind which i knew
the enemy was in great strength, and enter it in beautiful style.
then arose the severest musketry-fire i ever heard, and lasted some
twenty minutes, when this splendid regiment had to fall back. this
green point of timber is about five hundred yards east of shiloh
meeting-home, and it was evident here was to be the struggle. the
enemy could also be seen forming his lines to the south. general
mcclernand sending to me for artillery, i detached to him the three
guns of wood's battery, with which he speedily drove them back,
and, seeing some others to the rear, i sent one of my staff to
bring them forward, when, by almost providential decree, they
proved to be two twenty-four pound howitzers belonging to
mcalister's battery, and served as well as guns ever could
be.
this was about  p.m. the enemy had one battery close by shiloh,
and another near the hamburg road, both pouring grape and canister
upon any column of troops that advanced upon the green point of
water-oaks. willich's regiment had been repulsed, but a whole
brigade of mccook's division advanced beautifully, deployed, and
entered this dreaded wood. i ordered my second brigade (then
commanded by colonel t. kilby smith, colonel smart being wounded)
to form on its right, and my fourth brigade, colonel buckland, on
its right; all to advance abreast with this kentucky brigade before
mentioned, which i afterward found to be rousseau's brigade of
mccook's division. i gave personal direction to the twenty-four
pounder guns, whose well-directed fire first silenced the enemy's
guns to the left, and afterward at the shiloh meeting-house.
rousseau's brigade moved in splendid order steadily to the front,
sweeping every thing before it, and at  p.m. we stood upon the
ground of our original front line; and the enemy was in full
retreat. i directed my several brigades to resume at once their
original camps.
several times during the battle, cartridges gave out; but general
grant had thoughtfully kept a supply coming from the rear. when i
appealed to regiments to stand fast, although out of cartridges, i
did so because, to retire a regiment for any cause, has a bad
effect on others. i commend the fortieth illinois and thirteenth
missouri for thus holding their ground under heavy fire, although
their cartridge-boxes were empty.
i am ordered by general grant to give personal credit where i think
it is due, and censure where i think it merited. i concede that
general mccook's splendid division from kentucky drove back the
enemy along the corinth road, which was the great centre of this
field of battle, where beauregard commanded in person, supported by
bragg's, polk's, and breckenridge's divisions. i think johnston was
killed by exposing himself in front of his troops, at the time of
their attack on buckland's brigade on sunday morning; although in
this i may be mistaken.
my division was made up of regiments perfectly new, nearly all
having received their muskets for the first time at paducah. none
of them had ever been under fire or beheld heavy columns of an
enemy bearing down on them as they did on last sunday.
to expect of them the coolness and steadiness of older troops would
be wrong. they knew not the value of combination and organization.
when individual fears seized them, the first impulse was to get
away. my third brigade did break much too soon, and i am not yet
advised where they were during sunday afternoon and monday morning.
colonel hildebrand, its commander, was as cool as any man i ever
saw, and no one could have made stronger efforts to hold his men to
their places than he did. he kept his own regiment with individual
exceptions in hand, an hour after appler's and mungen's regiments
had left their proper field of action. colonel buckland managed his
brigade well. i commend him to your notice as a cool, intelligent,
and judicious gentleman, needing only confidence and experience, to
make a good commander. his subordinates, colonels sullivan and
cockerill, behaved with great gallantry; the former receiving a
severe wound on sunday, and yet commanding and holding his regiment
well in hand all day, and on monday, until his right arm was broken
by a shot. colonel cookerill held a larger proportion of his men
than any colonel in my division, and was with me from first to
last.
colonel j. a. mcdowell, commanding the first brigade, held his
ground on sunday, till i ordered him to fall back, which he did in
line of battle; and when ordered, he conducted the attack on the
enemy's left in good style. in falling back to the next position,
he was thrown from his horse and injured, and his brigade was not
in position on monday morning. his subordinates, colonels hicks and
worthington, displayed great personal courage. colonel hicks led
his regiment in the attack on sunday, and received a wound, which
it is feared may prove mortal. he is a brave and gallant gentleman,
and deserves well of his country. lieutenant-colonel walcutt, of
the ohio forty-sixth, was severely wounded on sunday, and has been
disabled ever since. my second brigade, colonel stuart, was
detached nearly two miles from my headquarters. he had to fight his
own battle on sunday, against superior numbers, as the enemy
interposed between him and general prentiss early in the day.
colonel stuart was wounded severely, and yet reported for duty on
monday morning, but was compelled to leave during the day, when the
command devolved on colonel t. kilby smith, who was always in the
thickest of the fight, and led the brigade handsomely.
i have not yet received colonel stuart's report of the operations
of his brigade during the time he was detached, and must therefore
forbear to mention names. lieutenant-colonel kyle, of the
seventy-first, was mortally wounded on sunday, but the regiment
itself i did not see, as only a small fragment of it was with the
brigade when it joined the division on monday morning. great credit
is due the fragments of men of the disordered regiments who kept in
the advance. i observed and noticed them, but until the brigadiers
and colonels make their reports, i cannot venture to name
individuals, but will in due season notice all who kept in our
front line, as well as those who preferred to keep back near the
steamboat-landing. i will also send a full list of the killed,
wounded, and missing, by name, rank, company, and regiment. at
present i submit the result in figures:
[summary of general sherman's detailed table:]
killed ........................
wounded .......................
missing .......................
aggregate loss in the division:
the enemy captured seven of our guns on sunday, but on monday we
recovered seven; not the identical guns we had lost, but enough in
number to balance the account. at the time of recovering our camps
our men were so fatigued that we could not follow the retreating
masses of the enemy; but on the following day i followed up with
buckland's and hildebrand's brigade for six miles, the result of
which i have already reported.
of my personal staff, i can only speak with praise and thanks. i
think they smelled as much gunpowder and heard as many cannon-balls
and bullets as must satisfy their ambition. captain hammond, my
chief of staff, though in feeble health, was very active in
rallying broken troops, encouraging the steadfast and aiding to
form the lines of defense and attack. i recommend him to your
notice. major sanger's intelligence, quick perception, and rapid
execution, were of very great value to me, especially in bringing
into line the batteries that cooperated so efficiently in our
movements. captains mccoy and dayton, aides-de-camp, were with me
all the time, carrying orders, and acting with coolness, spirit,
and courage. to surgeon hartshorne and dr. l'hommedieu hundreds of
wounded men are indebted for the kind and excellent treatment
received on the field of battle and in the various temporary
hospitals created along the line of our operations. they worked day
and night, and did not rest till all the wounded of our own troops
as well as of the enemy were in safe and comfortable shelter. to
major taylor, chief of artillery, i feel under deep obligations,
for his good sense and judgment in managing the batteries, on which
so much depended. i inclose his report and indorse his
recommendations. the cavalry of my command kept to the rear, and
took little part in the action; but it would have been madness to
have exposed horses to the musketry-fire under which we were
compelled to remain from sunday at  a.m. till monday at  p.m.
captain kossack, of the engineers, was with me all the time, and
was of great assistance. i inclose his sketch of the battlefield,
which is the best i have seen, and which will enable you to see the
various positions occupied by my division, as well as of the others
that participated in the battle. i will also send in, during the
day, the detailed reports of my brigadiers and colonels, and will
indorse them with such remarks as i deem proper.
i am, with much respect, your obedient servant,
brigadier-general commanding fifth division.
tuesday, april ,
sir: with the cavalry placed at my command and two brigades of my
fatigued troops, i went this morning out on the corinth road. one
after another of the abandoned camps of the enemy lined the roads,
with hospital flags for their protection; at all we found more or
less wounded and dead men. at the forks of the road i found the
head of general t. j. wood's division of buell's army. i ordered
cavalry to examine both roads leading toward corinth, and found the
enemy on both. colonel dickey, of the fourth illinois cavalry,
asking for reenforcements, i ordered general wood to advance the
head of his column cautiously on the left-hand road, while i
conducted the head of the third brigade of my division up the
right-hand road. about half a mile from the forks was a clear
field, through which the road passed, and, immediately beyond, a
space of some two hundred yards of fallen timber, and beyond that
an extensive rebel camp. the enemy's cavalry could be seen in this
camp; after reconnoisance, i ordered the two advance companies of
the ohio seventy-seventh, colonel hildebrand, to deploy forward as
skirmishers, and the regiment itself forward into line, with an
interval of one hundred yards. in this order we advanced cautiously
until the skirmishers were engaged. taking it for granted this
disposition would clear the camp, i held colonel dickey's fourth
illinois cavalry ready for the charge. the enemy's cavalry came
down boldly at a charge, led by general forrest in person, breaking
through our line of skirmishers; when the regiment of infantry,
without cause, broke, threw away their muskets, and fled. the
ground was admirably adapted for a defense of infantry against
cavalry, being miry and covered with fallen timber.
as the regiment of infantry broke, dickey's cavalry began to
discharge their carbines, and fell into disorder. i instantly sent
orders to the rear for the brigade to form line of battle, which
was promptly executed. the broken infantry and cavalry rallied on
this line, and, as the enemy's cavalry came to it, our cavalry in
turn charged and drove them from the field. i advanced the entire
brigade over the same ground and sent colonel dickey's cavalry a
mile farther on the road. on examining the ground which had been
occupied by the seventy-seventh ohio, we found fifteen of our men
dead and about twenty-five wounded. i sent for wagons and had all
the wounded carried back to camp, and caused the dead to be buried,
also the whole rebel camp to be destroyed.
here we found much ammunition for field-pieces, which was
destroyed; also two caissons, and a general hospital, with about
two hundred and eighty confederate wounded, and about fifty of our
own wounded men. not having the means of bringing them off, colonel
dickey, by my orders, took a surrender, signed by the medical
director (lyle) and by all the attending surgeons, and a pledge to
report themselves to you as prisoners of war; also a pledge that
our wounded should be carefully attended to, and surrendered to us
to-morrow as soon as ambulances could go out. i inclose this
written document, and request that you cause wagons or ambulances
for our wounded to be sent to-morrow, and that wagons' be sent to
bring in the many tents belonging to us which are pitched along the
road for four miles out. i did not destroy them, because i knew the
enemy could not move them. the roads are very bad, and are strewed
with abandoned wagons, ambulances, and limber-boxes. the enemy has
succeeded in carrying off the guns, but has crippled his batteries
by abandoning the hind limber-boxes of at least twenty caissons. i
am satisfied the enemy's infantry and artillery passed lick creek
this morning, traveling all of last night, and that he left to his
rear all his cavalry, which has protected his retreat; but signs of
confusion and disorder mark the whole road. the check sustained by
us at the fallen timber delayed our advance, so that night came
upon us before the wounded were provided for and the dead buried,
and our troops being fagged out by three days' hard fighting,
exposure, and privation, i ordered them back to their camps, where
they now are.
i have the honor to be, your obedient servant,
w.t. sherman brigadier-general commanding division.
general grant did not make an official report of the battle of
shiloh, but all its incidents and events were covered by the
reports of division commanders and subordinates. probably no single
battle of the war gave rise to such wild and damaging reports. it
was publicly asserted at the north that our army was taken
completely by surprise; that the rebels caught us in our tents;
bayoneted the men in their beds; that general grant was drunk; that
buell's opportune arrival saved the army of the tennessee from
utter annihilation, etc. these reports were in a measure sustained
by the published opinions of generals buell, nelson, and others,
who had reached the steamboat-landing from the east, just before
nightfall of the th, when there was a large crowd of frightened,
stampeded men, who clamored and declared that our army was all
destroyed and beaten. personally i saw general grant, who with his
staff visited me about  a.m. of the th, when we were desperately
engaged. but we had checked the headlong assault of our enemy, and
then held our ground. this gave him great satisfaction, and he told
me that things did not look as well over on the left. he also told
me that on his way up from savannah that morning he had stopped at
crump's landing, and had ordered lew wallace's division to cross
over snake creek, so as to come up on my right, telling me to look
out for him. he came again just before dark, and described the last
assault made by the rebels at the ravine, near the
steamboat-landing, which he had repelled by a heavy battery
collected under colonel j. d. webster and other officers, and he
was convinced that the battle was over for that day. he ordered me
to be ready to assume the offensive in the morning, saying that, as
he had observed at fort donelson at the crisis of the battle, both
sides seemed defeated, and whoever assumed the offensive was sure
to win. general grant also explained to me that general buell had
reached the bank of the tennessee river opposite pittsburg landing,
and was in the act of ferrying his troops across at the time he was
speaking to me.
about half an hour afterward general buell himself rode up to
where i was, accompanied by colonels fry, michler, and others of
his staff. i was dismounted at the time, and general buell made of
me a good many significant inquiries about matters and things
generally. by the aid of a manuscript map made by myself, i pointed
out to him our positions as they had been in the morning, and our
then positions; i also explained that my right then covered the
bridge over snake creek by which we had all day been expecting lew
wallace; that mcclernand was on my left, hurlbut on his left, and
so on. but buell said he had come up from the landing, and had not
seen our men, of whose existence in fact he seemed to doubt. i
insisted that i had five thousand good men still left in line, and
thought that mcclernand had as many more, and that with what was
left of hurlbut's, w. h. l. wallace's, and prentiss's divisions, we
ought to have eighteen thousand men fit for battle. i reckoned that
ten thousand of our men were dead, wounded, or prisoners, and that
the enemy's loss could not be much less. buell said that nelson's,
mccook's, and crittendens divisions of his army, containing
eighteen thousand men, had arrived and could cross over in the
night, and be ready for the next day's battle. i argued that with
these reenforcements we could sweep the field. buell seemed to
mistrust us, and repeatedly said that he did not like the looks of
things, especially about the boat-landing,—and i really
feared he would not cross over his army that night, lest he should
become involved in our general disaster. he did not, of course,
understand the shape of the ground, and asked me for the use of my
map, which i lent him on the promise that he would return it. he
handed it to major michler to have it copied, and the original
returned to me, which michler did two or three days after the
battle. buell did cross over that night, and the next day we
assumed the offensive and swept the field, thus gaining the battle
decisively. nevertheless, the controversy was started and kept up,
mostly to the personal prejudice of general grant, who as usual
maintained an imperturbable silence.
after the battle, a constant stream of civilian surgeons, and
sanitary commission agents, men and women, came up the tennessee to
bring relief to the thousands of maimed and wounded soldiers for
whom we had imperfect means of shelter and care. these people
caught up the camp-stories, which on their return home they
retailed through their local papers, usually elevating their own
neighbors into heroes, but decrying all others: among them was
lieutenant-governor stanton, of ohio, who published in belfontaine,
ohio, a most abusive article about general grant and his
subordinate generals. as general grant did not and would not take
up the cudgels, i did so. my letter in reply to stanton, dated june
, , was published in the cincinnati commercial soon after its
date. to this lieutenant-governor stanton replied, and i further
rejoined in a letter dated july , . these letters are too
personal to be revived. by this time the good people of the north
had begun to have their eyes opened, and to give us in the field
more faith and support. stanton was never again elected to any
public office, and was commonly spoken of as "the late mr.
stanton." he is now dead, and i doubt not in life he often
regretted his mistake in attempting to gain popular fame by abusing
the army-leaders, then as now an easy and favorite mode of gaining
notoriety, if not popularity. of course, subsequent events gave
general grant and most of the other actors in that battle their
appropriate place in history, but the danger of sudden popular
clamors is well illustrated by this case.
the battle of shiloh, or pittsburg landing, was one of the most
fiercely contested of the war. on the morning of april , , the
five divisions of mcclernand, prentiss, hurlbut, w. h. l. wallace,
and sherman, aggregated about thirty-two thousand men. we had no
intrenchments of any sort, on the theory that as soon as buell
arrived we would march to corinth to attack the enemy. the rebel
army, commanded by general albert sidney johnston, was, according
to their own reports and admissions, forty-five thousand strong,
had the momentum of attack, and beyond all question fought
skillfully from early morning till about  a.m., when their
commander-in-chief was killed by a mini-ball in the calf of his
leg, which penetrated the boot and severed the main artery. there
was then a perceptible lull for a couple of hours, when the attack
was renewed, but with much less vehemence, and continued up to
dark. early at night the division of lew wallace arrived from the
other side of snake creek, not having fired a shot. a very small
part of general buell's army was on our side of the tennessee river
that evening, and their loss was trivial.
during that night, the three divisions of mccook, nelson, and
crittenden, were ferried across the tennessee, and fought with us
the next day (th). during that night, also, the two wooden
gunboats, tyler, commanded by lieutenant groin, and lexington,
lieutenant shirk, both of the regular navy, caused shells to be
thrown toward that part of the field of battle known to be occupied
by the enemy. beauregard afterward reported his entire loss as ten
thousand six hundred and ninety-nine. our aggregate loss, made up
from official statements, shows seventeen hundred killed, seven
thousand four hundred and ninety-five wounded, and three thousand
and twenty-two prisoners; aggregate, twelve thousand two hundred
and seventeen, of which twenty-one hundred and sixty-seven were in
buell's army, leaving for that of grant ten thousand and fifty.
this result is a fair measure of the amount of fighting done by
each army.
while, the "army of the tennessee," under generals grant and c.
f. smith, was operating up the tennessee river, another force,
styled the "army of the mississippi," commanded by major-general
john pope, was moving directly down the mississippi river, against
that portion of the rebel line which, under generals polk and
pillow, had fallen back from columbus, kentucky, to island number
ten and new madrid. this army had the full cooperation of the
gunboat fleet, commanded by admiral foote, and was assisted by the
high flood of that season, which enabled general pope, by great
skill and industry, to open a canal from a point above island
number ten to new madrid below, by which he interposed between the
rebel army and its available line of supply and retreat. at the
very time that we were fighting the bloody battle on the tennessee
river, general pope and admiral foote were bombarding the batteries
on island number ten, and the kentucky shore abreast of it; and
general pope having crossed over by steamers a part of his army to
the east bank, captured a large part of this rebel army, at and
near tiptonville.
general halleck still remained at st. louis, whence he gave
general directions to the armies of general curtis, generals grant,
buell, and pope; and instead of following up his most important and
brilliant successes directly down the mississippi, he concluded to
bring general pope's army around to the tennessee, and to come in
person to command there. the gunboat fleet pushed on down the
mississippi, but was brought up again all standing by the heavy
batteries at fort pillow, about fifty miles above memphis. about
this time admiral farragut, with another large sea-going fleet, and
with the cooperating army of general butler, was entering the
mississippi river by the passes, and preparing to reduce forts
jackson and st, philip in order to reach new orleans; so that all
minds were turned to the conquest of the mississippi river, and
surely adequate means were provided for the undertaking.
the battle of shiloh had been fought, as described, on the th
and th of april; and when the movement of the th had revealed
that our enemy was gone, in full retreat, leaving killed, wounded,
and much property by the way, we all experienced a feeling of
relief. the struggle had been so long, so desperate and bloody,
that the survivors seemed exhausted and nerveless; we appreciated
the value of the victory, but realized also its great cost of life.
the close of the battle had left the army of the tennessee on the
right, and the army of the ohio on the left; but i believe neither
general grant nor buell exercised command, the one over the other;
each of them having his hands full in repairing damages. all the
division, brigade, and regimental commanders were busy in
collecting stragglers, regaining lost property, in burying dead men
and horses, and in providing for their wounded. some few new
regiments came forward, and some changes of organization became
necessary. then, or very soon after, i consolidated my font
brigades into three, which were commanded: first, brigadier-general
morgan l: smith; second, colonel john a. mcdowell; third,
brigadier-general j. w. denver. about the same time i was promoted
to major-general volunteers.
the seventy-first ohio was detached to clarksville, tennessee,
and the sixth and eighth missouri were transferred to my
division.
in a few days after the battle, general halleck arrived by
steamboat from st. louis, pitched his camp near the
steamboat-landing, and assumed personal command of all the armies.
he was attended by his staff, composed of general g. w. cullum, u.
s. engineers, as his chief of staff; colonel george thom, u. s.
engineers; and colonels kelton and kemper, adjutants-general. it
soon became manifest that his mind had been prejudiced by the
rumors which had gone forth to the detriment of general grant; for
in a few days he issued an order, reorganizing and rearranging the
whole army. general buell's army of the ohio constituted the
centre; general pope's army, then arriving at hamburg landing, was
the left; the right was made up of mine and hurlbut's divisions,
belonging to the old army of the tennessee, and two new ones, made
up from the fragments of the divisions of prentiss and c. f. smith,
and of troops transferred thereto, commanded by generals t. w.
sherman and davies. general george h. thomas was taken from buell,
to command the right. mcclernand's and lew wallace's divisions were
styled the reserve, to be commanded by mcclernand. general grant
was substantially left out, and was named "second in command,"
according to some french notion, with no clear, well-defined
command or authority. he still retained his old staff, composed of
rawlins, adjutant-general; riggin, lagow, and hilyer, aides; and he
had a small company of the fourth illinois cavalry as an escort.
for more than a month he thus remained, without any apparent
authority, frequently visiting me and others, and rarely
complaining; but i could see that he felt deeply the indignity, if
not insult, heaped upon him.
general thomas at once assumed command of the right wing, and,
until we reached corinth, i served immediately under his command.
we were classmates, intimately acquainted, had served together
before in the old army, and in kentucky, and it made to us little
difference who commanded the other, provided the good cause
prevailed.
corinth was about thirty miles distant, and we all knew that we
should find there the same army with which we had so fiercely
grappled at shiloh, reorganized, reenforced, and commanded in chief
by general beauregard in place of johnston, who had fallen at
shiloh. but we were also reenforced by buell's and pope's armies;
so that before the end of april our army extended from snake creek
on the right to the tennessee river, at hamburg, on the left, and
must have numbered nearly one hundred thousand men.
ample supplies of all kinds reached us by the tennessee river,
which had a good stage of water; but our wagon transportation was
limited, and much confusion occurred in hauling supplies to the
several camps. by the end of aril, the several armies seemed to be
ready, and the general forward movement on corinth began. my
division was on the extreme right of the right wing, and marched
out by the "white house," leaving monterey or pea ridge to the
south. crossing lick creek, we came into the main road about a mile
south of monterey, where we turned square to the right, and came
into the purdy road, near "elams." thence we followed the purdy
road to corinth, my skirmishers reaching at all times the mobile
& ohio railroad. of course our marches were governed by the
main centre, which followed the direct road from pittsburg landing
to corinth; and this movement was provokingly slow. we fortified
almost every camp at night, though we had encountered no serious
opposition, except from cavalry, which gave ground easily as we
advanced. the opposition increased as we neared corinth, and at a
place called russell's we had a sharp affair of one brigade, under
the immediate direction of brigadier-general morgan l. smith,
assisted by the brigade of general denver. this affair occurred on
the th of may, and our line was then within about two miles of
the northern intrenchments of corinth.
on the th i received orders from general halleck "to send a
force the next day to drive the rebels from the house in our front,
on the corinth road, to drive in their pickets as far as possible,
and to make a strong demonstration on corinth itself;" authorizing
me to call on any adjacent division for assistance.
i reconnoitred the ground carefully, and found that the main
road led forward along the fence of a large cotton-field to our
right front, and ascended a wooded hill, occupied in some force by
the enemy, on which was the farm-house referred to in general
halleck's orders. at the farther end of the field was a double
log-house, whose chinking had been removed; so that it formed a
good block house from which the enemy could fire on any person
approaching from our quarter.
general hurlbut's division was on my immediate left, and general
mcclernand's reserve on our right rear. i asked of each the
assistance of a brigade. the former sent general veatch's, and the
latter general john a. logan's brigade. i asked the former to
support our left flank, and the latter our right flank. the next
morning early, morgan l. smith's brigade was deployed under cover
on the left, and denver's on the right, ready to move forward
rapidly at a signal. i had a battery of four twenty-pound parrott
guns, commanded by captain silversparre. colonel ezra taylor, chief
of artillery, had two of these guns moved up silently by hand
behind a small knoll, from the crest of which the enemy's
block-house and position could be distinctly seen; when all were
ready, these guns were moved to the crest, and several quick rounds
were fired at the house, followed after an interval by a single
gum. this was the signal agreed on, and the troops responded
beautifully, crossed the field in line of battle, preceded by their
skirmishers who carried the position in good style, and pursued the
enemy for half a mile beyond.
the main line halted on the crest of the ridge, from which we
could look over the parapets of the rebel works at corinth, and
hear their drum and bugle calls. the rebel brigade had evidently
been taken by surprise in our attack; it soon rallied and came back
on us with the usual yell, driving in our skirmishers, but was
quickly checked when it came within range of our guns and line of
battle. generals grant and thomas happened to be with me during
this affair, and were well pleased at the handsome manner in which
the troops behaved. that night we began the usual entrenchments,
and the next day brought forward the artillery and the rest of the
division, which then extended from the mobile & ohio railroad,
at bowie hill out, to the corinth & purdy road, there
connecting with hurlbut's division. that night, viz., may th, we
heard unusual sounds in corinth, the constant whistling of
locomotives, and soon after daylight occurred a series of
explosions followed by a dense smoke rising high over the town.
there was a telegraph line connecting my headquarters with those of
general halleck, about four miles off, on the hamburg road. i
inquired if he knew the cause of the explosions and of the smoke,
and he answered to "advance with my division and feel the enemy if
still in my front" i immediately dispatched two regiments from each
of my three brigades to feel the immediate front, and in a very
short time advanced with the whole division. each brigade found the
rebel parapets abandoned, and pushed straight for the town, which
lies in the northeast angle of intersection of the mobile &
ohio and memphis & charleston railroads. many buildings had
been burned by the enemy on evacuation, which had begun the night
before at  p.m., and continued through the night, the rear-guard
burning their magazine at the time of withdrawing, about daybreak.
morgan l. smith's brigade followed the retreating rear-guard some
four miles to the tuacumbia bridge, which was found burned. i
halted the other brigades at the college, about a mile to the
southwest of the town, where i was overtaken by general thomas in
person.
the heads of all the columns had entered the rebel lines about
the same time, and there was some rather foolish clamor for the
first honors, but in fact there was no honor in the event.
beauregard had made a clean retreat to the south, and was only
seriously pursued by cavalry from general pope's flank. but he
reached tupelo, where he halted for reorganization; and there is no
doubt that at the moment there was much disorganization in his
ranks, for the woods were full of deserters whom we did not even
take prisoners, but advised them to make their way home and stay
there. we spent the day at and near the college, when general
thomas, who applied for orders at halleck's headquarters, directed
me to conduct my division back to the camp of the night before,
where we had left our trains the advance on corinth had occupied
all of the month of may, the most beautiful and valuable month of
the year for campaigning in this latitude. there had been little
fighting, save on general pope's left flank about farmington; and
on our right. i esteemed it a magnificent drill, as it served for
the instruction of our men in guard and picket duty, and in
habituating them to out-door life; and by the time we had reached
corinth i believe that army was the best then on this continent,
and could have gone where it pleased. the four subdivisions were
well commanded, as were the divisions and brigades of the whole
army. general halleck was a man of great capacity, of large
acquirements, and at the time possessed the confidence of the
country, and of most of the army. i held him in high estimation,
and gave him credit for the combinations which had resulted in
placing this magnificent army of a hundred thousand men, well
equipped and provided, with a good base, at corinth, from which he
could move in any direction.
had he held his force as a unit, he could have gone to mobile,
or vicksburg, or anywhere in that region, which would by one move
have solved the whole mississippi problem; and, from what he then
told me, i believe he intended such a campaign, but was overruled
from washington. be that as it may, the army had no sooner settled
down at corinth before it was scattered: general pope was called to
the east, and his army distributed among the others; general thomas
was relieved from the command of the right wing, and reassigned to
his division in the army of the ohio; and that whole army under
general buell was turned east along the memphis & charleston
road, to march for chattanooga. mcclernand's "reserve" was turned
west to bolivar and memphis. general halleck took post himself at
corinth, assigned lieutenant-colonel mcpherson to take charge of
the railroads, with instructions to repair them as far as columbus,
kentucky, and to collect cars and locomotives to operate them to
corinth and grand junction. i was soon dispatched with my own and
hurlbut's divisions northwest fourteen miles to chewalla, to save
what could be of any value out of six trains of cars belonging to
the rebels which had been wrecked and partially burned at the time
of the evacuation of corinth.
a short time before leaving corinth i rode from my camp to
general halleck's headquarters, then in tents just outside of the
town, where we sat and gossiped for some time, when he mentioned to
me casually that general grant was going away the next morning. i
inquired the cause, and he said that he did not know, but that
grant had applied for a thirty days' leave, which had been given
him. of course we all knew that he was chafing under the slights of
his anomalous position, and i determined to see him on my way back.
his camp was a short distance off the monterey road, in the woods,
and consisted of four or five tents, with a sapling railing around
the front. as i rode up, majors rawlins, lagow, and hilyer, were in
front of the camp, and piled up near them were the usual office and
camp chests, all ready for a start in the morning. i inquired for
the general, and was shown to his tent, where i found him seated on
a camp-stool, with papers on a rude camp-table; he seemed to be
employed in assorting letters, and tying them up with red tape into
convenient bundles. after passing the usual compliments, i inquired
if it were true that he was going away. he said, "yes." i then
inquired the reason, and he said "sherman, you know. you know that
i am in the way here. i have stood it as long as i can, and can
endure it no longer." i inquired where he was going to, and he
said, "st. louis." i then asked if he had any business there, and
he said, "not a bit." i then begged him to stay, illustrating his
case by my own.
before the battle of shiloh, i had been cast down by a mere
newspaper assertion of "crazy;" but that single battle had given me
new life, and now i was in high feather; and i argued with him
that, if he went away, events would go right along, and he would be
left out; whereas, if he remained, some happy accident might
restore him to favor and his true place. he certainly appreciated
my friendly advice, and promised to wait awhile; at all events, not
to go without seeing me again, or communicating with me. very soon
after this, i was ordered to chewalla, where, on the th of june, i
received a note from him, saying that he had reconsidered his
intention, and would remain. i cannot find the note, but my answer
i have kept:
chewalla, jane , .
major-general grant.
my dear sir: i have just received your note, and am rejoiced at
your conclusion to remain; for you could not be quiet at home for a
week when armies were moving, and rest could not relieve your mind
of the gnawing sensation that injustice had been done
you.
my orders at chewalla were to rescue the wrecked trains there,
to reconnoitre westward and estimate the amount of damage to the
railroad as far as grand junction, about fifty miles. we camped our
troops on high, healthy ground to the south of chewalla, and after
i had personally reconnoitred the country, details of men were made
and volunteer locomotive engineers obtained to superintend the
repairs. i found six locomotives and about sixty cars, thrown from
the track, parts of the machinery detached and hidden in the
surrounding swamp, and all damaged as much by fire as possible. it
seems that these trains were inside of corinth during the night of
evacuation, loading up with all sorts of commissary stores, etc.,
and about daylight were started west; but the cavalry-picket
stationed at the tuscumbia bridge had, by mistake or panic, burned
the bridge before the trains got to them. the trains, therefore,
were caught, and the engineers and guards hastily scattered the
stores into the swamp, and disabled the trains as far as they
could, before our cavalry had discovered their critical situation.
the weather was hot, and the swamp fairly stunk with the putrid
flour and fermenting sugar and molasses; i was so much exposed
there in the hot sun, pushing forward the work, that i got a touch
of malarial fever, which hung on me for a month, and forced me to
ride two days in an ambulance, the only time i ever did such a
thing during the whole war. by the th i reported to general
halleck that the amount of work necessary to reestablish the
railroad between corinth and grand junction was so great, that he
concluded not to attempt its repair, but to rely on the road back
to jackson (tennessee), and forward to grand junction; and i was
ordered to move to grand junction, to take up the repairs from
there toward memphis.
the evacuation of corinth by beauregard, and the movements of
general mcclernand's force toward memphis, had necessitated the
evacuation of fort pillow, which occurred about june st; soon
followed by the further withdrawal of the confederate army from
memphis, by reason of the destruction of the rebel gunboats in the
bold and dashing attack by our gun-boats under command of admiral
davis, who had succeeded foote. this occurred june th. admiral
farragut had also captured new orleans after the terrible passage
of forts jackson and st. philip on may th, and had ascended the
river as high as vicksburg; so that it seemed as though, before the
end of june, we should surely have full possession of the whole
river. but it is now known that the progress of our western armies
had aroused the rebel government to the exercise of the most
stupendous energy. every man capable of bearing arms at the south
was declared to be a soldier, and forced to act as such. all their
armies were greatly reenforced, and the most despotic power was
granted to enforce discipline and supplies. beauregard was replaced
by bragg, a man of more ability—of greater powers of
organization, of action, and discipline—but naturally
exacting and severe, and not possessing the qualities to attract
the love of his officers and men. he had a hard task to bring into
order and discipline that mass of men to whose command he succeeded
at tupelo, with which he afterward fairly outmanoeuvred general
buell, and forced him back from chattanooga to louisville. it was a
fatal mistake, however, that halted general halleck at corinth, and
led him to disperse and scatter the best materials for a fighting
army that, up to that date, had been assembled in the west.
during the latter part of june and first half of july, i had my
own and hurlbut's divisions about grand junction, lagrange, moscow,
and lafayette, building railroad-trestles and bridges, fighting off
cavalry detachments coming from the south, and waging an
everlasting quarrel with planters about their negroes and
fences—they trying, in the midst of moving armies, to raise a
crop of corn. on the th of june i sent a detachment of two
brigades, under general m. l. smith, to holly springs, in the
belief that i could better protect the railroad from some point in
front than by scattering our men along it; and, on the d, i was
at lafayette station, when general grant, with his staff and a very
insignificant escort, arrived from corinth en route for memphis, to
take command of that place and of the district of west tennessee.
he came very near falling into the hands of the enemy, who infested
the whole country with small but bold detachments of cavalry. up to
that time i had received my orders direct from general halleck at
corinth, but soon after i fell under the immediate command of
general grant and so continued to the end of the war; but, on the
th, general halleck notified me that "a division of troops under
general c. s. hamilton of 'rosecrans's army corps,' had passed the
hatchie from corinth," and was destined for holly springs, ordering
me to "cooperate as far as advisable," but "not to neglect the
protection of the road." i ordered general hurlbut to leave
detachments at grand junction and lagrange, and to march for holly
springs. i left detachments at moscow and lafayette, and, with
about four thousand men, marched for the same point. hurlbut and i
met at hudsonville, and thence marched to the coldwater, within
four miles of holly springs. we encountered only small detachments
of rebel cavalry under colonels jackson and pierson, and drove them
into and through holly springs; but they hung about, and i kept an
infantry brigade in holly springs to keep them out. i heard nothing
from general hamilton till the th of july, when i received a
letter from him dated rienzi, saying that he had been within
nineteen miles of holly springs and had turned back for corinth;
and on the next day, july th, i got a telegraph order from general
halleck, of july d, sent me by courier from moscow, "not to
attempt to hold holly springs, but to fall back and protect the
railroad." we accordingly marched back twenty-five
miles—hurlbut to lagrange, and i to moscow. the enemy had no
infantry nearer than the tallahatchee bridge, but their cavalry was
saucy and active, superior to ours, and i despaired of ever
protecting a railroad, preventing a broad front of one hundred
miles, from their dashes.
about this time, we were taunted by the confederate soldiers and
citizens with the assertion that lee had defeated mcclellan at
richmond; that he would soon be in washington; and that our turn
would come next. the extreme caution of general halleck also
indicated that something had gone wrong, and, on the th of july,
at moscow, i received a dispatch from him, announcing that he had
been summoned to washington, which he seemed to regret, and which
at that moment i most deeply deplored. he announced that his
command would devolve on general grant, who had been summoned
around from memphis to corinth by way of columbus, kentucky, and
that i was to go into memphis to take command of the district of
west tennessee, vacated by general grant. by this time, also, i was
made aware that the great, army that had assembled at corinth at
the end of may had been scattered and dissipated, and that terrible
disasters had befallen our other armies in virginia and the
east.
i soon received orders to move to memphis, taking hurlbut's
division along. we reached memphis on the st, and on the d i
posted my three brigades mostly in and near fort dickering, and
hurlbut's division next below on the river-bank by reason of the
scarcity of water, except in the mississippi river itself. the
weather was intensely hot. the same order that took us to memphis
required me to send the division of general lew wallace (then
commanded by brigadier-general a. p. hovey) to helena, arkansas, to
report to general curtis, which was easily accomplished by
steamboat. i made my own camp in a vacant lot, near mr. moon's
house, and gave my chief attention to the construction of fort
pickering, then in charge of major prime, united states engineers;
to perfecting the drill and discipline of the two divisions under
my command; and to the administration of civil affairs.
at the time when general halleck was summoned from corinth to
washington, to succeed mcclellan as commander-in-chief, i surely
expected of him immediate and important results. the army of the
ohio was at the time marching toward chattanooga, and was strung
from eastport by huntsville to bridgeport, under the command of
general buell. in like manner, the army of the tennessee was strung
along the same general line, from memphis to tuscumbia, and was
commanded by general grant, with no common commander for both these
forces: so that the great army which general halleck had so well
assembled at corinth, was put on the defensive, with a frontage of
three hundred miles. soon thereafter the rebels displayed peculiar
energy and military skill. general bragg had reorganized the army
of beauregard at tupelo, carried it rapidly and skillfully toward
chattanooga, whence he boldly assumed the offensive, moving
straight for nashville and louisville, and compelling general buell
to fall back to the ohio river at louisville.
the army of van dorn and price had been brought from the
trans-mississippi department to the east of the river, and was
collected at and about holly springs, where, reenforced by
armstrong's and forrests cavalry, it amounted to about forty
thousand brave and hardy soldiers. these were general grant's
immediate antagonists, and so many and large detachments had been
drawn from him, that for a time he was put on the defensive. in
person he had his headquarters at corinth, with the three divisions
of hamilton, davies, and mckean, under the immediate orders of
general rosecrans. general ord had succeeded to the division of
mcclernand (who had also gone to washington), and held bolivar and
grand junction. i had in memphis my own and hurlbut's divisions,
and other smaller detachments were strung along the memphis &
charleston road. but the enemy's detachments could strike this road
at so many points, that no use could be made of it, and general
grant had to employ the railroads, from columbus, kentucky, to
corinth and grand junction, by way of jackson, tennessee, a point
common to both roads, and held in some force.
in the early part of september the enemy in our front manifested
great activity, feeling with cavalry at all points, and on the th
general van dorn threatened corinth, while general price seized the
town of iuka, which was promptly abandoned by a small garrison
under colonel murphy. price's force was about eight thousand men,
and the general impression was that he was en route for eastport,
with the purpose to cross the tennessee river in the direction of
nashville, in aid of general bragg, then in full career for
kentucky. general grant determined to attack him in force, prepared
to regain corinth before van dorn could reach it. he had drawn ord
to corinth, and moved him, by burnsville, on iuka, by the main
road, twenty-six miles. general grant accompanied this column as
far as burnsville. at the same time he had dispatched rosecrans by
roads to the south, via jacinto, with orders to approach iuka by
the two main roads, coming into iuka from the south, viz., they
jacinto and fulton roads.
on the th general ord encountered the enemy about four miles
out of iuka. his orders contemplated that he should not make a
serious attack, until rosecrans had gained his position on the
south; but, as usual, rosecrans had encountered difficulties in the
confusion of roads, his head of column did not reach the vicinity
of iuka till  p.m. of the th, and then his troops were long
drawn out on the single jacinto road, leaving the fulton road clear
for price's use. price perceived his advantage, and attacked with
vehemence the head of rosecrans's column, hamilton's division,
beating it back, capturing a battery, and killing and disabling
seven hundred and thirty-six men, so that when night closed in
rosecrans was driven to the defensive, and price, perceiving his
danger, deliberately withdrew by the fulton road, and the next
morning was gone. although general ord must have been within four
or six miles of this battle, he did not hear a sound; and he or
general grant did not know of it till advised the next morning by a
courier who had made a wide circuit to reach them. general grant
was much offended with general rosecrans because of this affair,
but in my experience these concerted movements generally fail,
unless with the very best kind of troops, and then in a country on
whose roads some reliance can be placed, which is not the case in
northern mississippi. if price was aiming for tennessee; he failed,
and was therefore beaten. he made a wide circuit by the south, and
again joined van dorn.
on the th of september, at memphis, i received an order from
general grant dated the d, to send hurlbut's division to
brownsville, in the direction of bolivar, thence to report by
letter to him at jackson. the division started the same day, and,
as our men and officers had been together side by side from the
first landing at shiloh, we felt the parting like the breaking up
of a family. but general grant was forced to use every man, for he
knew well that van dorn could attack him at pleasure, at any point
of his long line. to be the better prepared, on the d of
september he took post himself at jackson, tennessee, with a small
reserve force, and gave rosecrans command of corinth, with his
three divisions and some detachments, aggregating about twenty
thousand men. he posted general ord with his own and hurlbut'a
divisions at bolivar, with outposts toward grand junction and
lagrange. these amounted to nine or ten thousand men, and i held
memphis with my own division, amounting to about six thousand men.
the whole of general grant's men at that time may have aggregated
fifty thousand, but he had to defend a frontage of a hundred and
fifty miles, guard some two hundred miles of railway, and as much
river. van dom had forty thousand men, united, at perfect liberty
to move in any direction, and to choose his own point of attack,
under cover of woods, and a superior body of cavalry, familiar with
every foot of the ground. therefore general grant had good reason
for telegraphing to general halleck, on the st of october, that
his position was precarious, "but i hope to get out of it all
right." in memphis my business was to hold fast that important
flank, and by that date fort dickering had been made very strong,
and capable of perfect defense by a single brigade. i therefore
endeavored by excursions to threaten van dorn's detachments to the
southeast and east. i repeatedly sent out strong detachments toward
holly springs, which was his main depot of supply; and general
grierson, with his sixth illinois, the only cavalry i had, made
some bold and successful dashes at the coldwater, compelling van
dorn to cover it by armstrong's whole division of cavalry. still,
by the st of october, general grant was satisfied that the enemy
was meditating an attack in force on bolivar or corinth; and on the
d van dorn made his appearance near corinth, with his entire army.
on the d he moved down on that place from the north and northwest,
general roseerana went out some four miles to meet him, but was
worsted and compelled to fall back within the line of his forts.
these had been began under general halleck, but were much
strengthened by general grant, and consisted of several detached
redoubts, bearing on each other, and inclosing the town and the
depots of stores at the intersection of the two railroads. van dorn
closed down on the forts by the evening of the d, and on the
morning of the th assaulted with great vehemence. our men, covered
by good parapets, fought gallantly, and defended their posts well,
inflicting terrible losses on the enemy, so that by noon the rebels
were repulsed at all points, and drew off, leaving their dead and
wounded in our hands. their losses, were variously estimated, but
the whole truth will probably never be known, for in that army
reports and returns were not the fashion. general rosecrans
admitted his own loss to be three hundred and fifteen killed,
eighteen hundred and twelve wounded, and two hundred and thirty-two
missing or prisoners, and claimed on the part of the rebels
fourteen hundred and twenty-three dead, two thousand and
twenty-five prisoners and wounded. of course, most of the wounded
must have gone off or been carried off, so that, beyond doubt, the
rebel army lost at corinth fully six thousand men.
meantime, general grant, at jackson, had dispatched
brigadier-general mcpherson, with a brigade, directly for corinth,
which reached general rosecrans after the battle; and, in
anticipation of his victory, had ordered him to pursue instantly,
notifying him that he had ordered ord's and hurlbut's divisions
rapidly across to pocahontas, so as to strike the rebels in flank.
on the morning of the th, general ord reached the hatchie river,
at davies bridge, with four thousand men; crossed over and
encountered the retreating army, captured a battery and several
hundred prisoners, dispersing the rebel advance, and forcing the
main column to make a wide circuit by the south in order to cross
the hatchie river. had general rosecrans pursued promptly, and been
on the heels of this mass of confused and routed men, van dorn's
army would surely have been utterly ruined; as it was, van dom
regained holly springs somewhat demoralized.
general rosecrans did not begin his pursuit till the next
morning, the th, and it was then too late. general grant was again
displeased with him, and never became fully reconciled. general
rosecrans was soon after relieved, and transferred to the army of
the cumberland, in tennessee, of which he afterward obtained the
command, in place of general buell, who was removed.
the effect of the battle of corinth was very great. it was,
indeed, a decisive blow to the confederate cause in our quarter,
and changed the whole aspect of affairs in west tennessee. from the
timid defensive we were at once enabled to assume the bold
offensive. in memphis i could see its effects upon the citizens,
and they openly admitted that their cause had sustained a
death-blow. but the rebel government was then at its maximum
strength; van dorn was reenforced, and very soon lieutenant-general
j. c. pemberton arrived and assumed the command, adopting for his
line the tallahatchie river, with an advance-guard along the
coldwater, and smaller detachments forward at grand junction and
hernando. general grant, in like manner, was reenforced by new
regiments.
out of those which were assigned to memphis, i organized two new
brigades, and placed them under officers who had gained skill and
experience during the previous campaign.
when we first entered memphis, july ,, i found the place
dead; no business doing, the stores closed, churches, schools, and
every thing shut up. the people were all more or less in sympathy
with our enemies, and there was a strong prospect that the whole
civil population would become a dead weight on our hands. inasmuch
as the mississippi river was then in our possession northward, and
steamboats were freely plying with passengers and freight, i caused
all the stores to be opened, churches, schools, theatres, and
places of amusement, to be reestablished, and very soon memphis
resumed its appearance of an active, busy, prosperous place. i also
restored the mayor (whose name was parks) and the city government
to the performance of their public functions, and required them to
maintain a good civil police.
up to that date neither congress nor the president had made any
clear, well-defined rules touching the negro slaves, and the
different generals had issued orders according to their own
political sentiments. both generals halleck and grant regarded the
slave as still a slave, only that the labor of the slave belonged
to his owner, if faithful to the union, or to the united states, if
the master had taken up arms against the government, or adhered to
the fortunes of the rebellion. therefore, in memphis, we received
all fugitives, put them to work on the fortifications, supplied
them with food and clothing, and reserved the question of payment
of wages for future decision. no force was allowed to be used to
restore a fugitive slave to his master in any event; but if the
master proved his loyalty, he was usually permitted to see his
slave, and, if he could persuade him to return home, it was
permitted. cotton, also, was a fruitful subject of controversy. the
secretary of the treasury; mr. chase, was extremely anxious at that
particular time to promote the purchase of cotton, because each
bale was worth, in gold, about three hundred dollars, and answered
the purpose of coin in our foreign exchanges. he therefore
encouraged the trade, so that hundreds of greedy speculators
flocked down the mississippi, and resorted to all sorts of measures
to obtain cotton from the interior, often purchasing it from
negroes who did not own it, but who knew where it was concealed.
this whole business was taken from the jurisdiction of the
military, and committed to treasury agents appointed by mr.
chase.
other questions absorbed the attention of military commanders;
and by way of illustration i here insert a few letters from my
"letter-book," which contains hundreds on similar subjects:
memphis, tennessee, august , 
hon. s. p. chase, secretary of the treasury.
sir: your letter of august d, just received, invites my discussion
of the cotton question.
i will write plainly and slowly, because i know you have no time to
listen to trifles. this is no trifle; when one nation is at war
with another, all the people of the one are enemies of the other:
then the rules are plain and easy of understanding. most
unfortunately, the war in which we are now engaged has been
complicated with the belief on the one hand that all on the other
are not enemies. it would have been better if, at the outset, this
mistake had not been made, and it is wrong longer to be misled by
it. the government of the united states may now safely proceed on
the proper rule that all in the south are enemies of all in the
north; and not only are they unfriendly, but all who can procure
arms now bear them as organized regiments, or as guerrillas. there
is not a garrison in tennessee where a man can go beyond the sight
of the flag-staff without being shot or captured. it so happened
that these people had cotton, and, whenever they apprehended our
large armies would move, they destroyed the cotton in the belief
that, of course, we world seize it, and convert it to our use. they
did not and could not dream that we would pay money for it. it had
been condemned to destruction by their own acknowledged government,
and was therefore lost to their people; and could have been,
without injustice, taken by us, and sent away, either as absolute
prize of war, or for future compensation. but the commercial
enterprise of the jews soon discovered that ten cents would buy a
pound of cotton behind our army; that four cents would take it to
boston, where they could receive thirty cents in gold. the bait was
too tempting, and it spread like fire, when here they discovered
that salt, bacon, powder, fire-arms, percussion-caps, etc., etc.,
were worth as much as gold; and, strange to say, this traffic was
not only permitted, but encouraged. before we in the interior could
know it, hundreds, yea thousands of barrels of salt and millions of
dollars had been disbursed; and i have no doubt that bragg's army
at tupelo, and van dorn's at vicksburg, received enough salt to
make bacon, without which they could not have moved their armies in
mass; and that from ten to twenty thousand fresh arms, and a due
supply of cartridges, have also been got, i am equally satisfied.
as soon as i got to memphis, having seen the effect in the
interior, i ordered (only as to my own command) that gold, silver,
and treasury notes, were contraband of war, and should not go into
the interior, where all were hostile. it is idle to talk about
union men here: many want peace, and fear war and its results; but
all prefer a southern, independent government, and are fighting or
working for it. every gold dollar that was spent for cotton, was
sent to the seaboard, to be exchanged for bank-notes and
confederate scrip, which will buy goods here, and are taken in
ordinary transactions. i therefore required cotton to be paid for
in such notes, by an obligation to pay at the end of the war, or by
a deposit of the price in the hands of a trustee, viz., the united
states quartermaster. under these rules cotton is being obtained
about as fast as by any other process, and yet the enemy receives
no "aid or comfort." under the "gold" rule, the country people who
had concealed their cotton from the burners, and who openly scorned
our greenbacks, were willing enough to take tennessee money, which
will buy their groceries; but now that the trade is to be
encouraged, and gold paid out, i admit that cotton will be sent in
by our open enemies, who can make better use of gold than they can
of their hidden bales of cotton.
i may not appreciate the foreign aspect of the question, but my
views on this may be ventured. if england ever threatens war
because we don't furnish her cotton, tell her plainly if she can't
employ and feed her own people, to send them here, where they
cannot only earn an honest living, but soon secure independence by
moderate labor. we are not bound to furnish her cotton. she has
more reason to fight the south for burning that cotton, than us for
not shipping it. to aid the south on this ground would be hypocrisy
which the world would detect at once. let her make her ultimatum,
and there are enough generous minds in europe that will counteract
her in the balance. of course her motive is to cripple a power that
rivals her in commerce and manufactures, that threatens even to
usurp her history. in twenty more years of prosperity, it will
require a close calculation to determine whether england, her laws
and history, claim for a home the continent of america or the isle
of britain. therefore, finding us in a death-struggle for
existence, she seems to seek a quarrel to destroy both parts in
detail.
southern people know this full well, and will only accept the
alliance of england in order to get arms and manufactures in
exchange for their cotton. the southern confederacy will accept no
other mediation, because she knows full well that in old england
her slaves and slavery will receive no more encouragement than in
new england.
france certainly does not need our cotton enough to disturb her
equilibrium, and her mediation would be entitled to a more respect
consideration than on the part of her present ally. but i feel
assured the french will not encourage rebellion and secession
anywhere as a political doctrine. certainly all the german states
must be our ardent friends; and, in case of european intervention;
they could not be kept down.
with great respect, your obedient servant,
w. t. sherman, major-general.
headquarters fifth division, army of the tennessee, memphis, july
dr. e. s. plummer and others, physician in memphis, signers to a
petition.
gentlemen: i have this moment received your communication, and
assure you that it grieves my heart thus to be the instrument of
adding to the seeming cruelty and hardship of this unnatural
war.
on my arrival here, i found my predecessor (general hovey) had
issued an order permitting the departure south of all persons
subject to the conscript law of the southern confederacy. many
applications have been made to me to modify this order, but i
regarded it as a condition precedent by which i was bound in honor,
and therefore i have made no changes or modifications; nor shall i
determine what action i shall adopt in relation to persons
unfriendly to our cause who remain after the time limited by
general hovey's order had expired. it is now sunset, and all who
have not availed themselves of general hovey's authority, and who
remain in memphis, are supposed to be loyal and true men.
i will only say that i cannot allow the personal convenience of
even a large class of ladies to influence me in my determination to
make memphis a safe place of operations for an army, and all people
who are unfriendly should forthwith prepare to depart in such
direction as i may hereafter indicate.
surgeons are not liable to be made prisoners of war, but they
should not reside within the lines of an army which they regard as
hostile. the situation would be too delicate.
i am, with great respect, your obedient servant,
w. t. sherman, major-general.
headquarters, memphis, july , 
samuel sawyer, esq., editor union appeal, memphis.
dear sir: it is well i should come to an understanding at once with
the press as well as the people of memphis, which i am ordered to
command; which means, to control for the interest, welfare; and
glory of the whole government of the united states.
personalities in a newspaper are wrong and criminal. thus, though
you meant to be complimentary in your sketch of my career, you make
more than a dozen mistakes of fact, which i need not correct, as i
don't desire my biography to be written till i am dead. it is
enough for the world to know that i live and am a soldier, bound to
obey the orders of my superiors, the laws of my country, and to
venerate its constitution; and that, when discretion is given me, i
shall exercise it wisely and account to my superiors.
i regard your article headed "city council—general sherman
and colonel slack," as highly indiscreet. of course, no person who
can jeopardize the safety of memphis can remain here, much less
exercise public authority; but i must take time, and be satisfied
that injustice be not done.
if the parties named be the men you describe, the fact should not
be published, to put them on their guard and thus to encourage
their escape. the evidence should be carefully collected,
authenticated, and then placed in my hands. but your statement of
facts is entirely qualified; in my mind, and loses its force by
your negligence of the very simple facts within your reach as to
myself: i had been in the army six years in ; am not related by
blood to any member of lucas, turner & co.; was associated with
them in business six years (instead of two); am not colonel of the
fifteenth infantry, but of the thirteenth. your correction, this
morning, of the acknowledged error as to general denver and others,
is still erroneous. general morgan l. smith did not belong to my
command at the battle of shiloh at all, but he was transferred to
my division just before reaching corinth. i mention these facts in
kindness, to show you how wrong it is to speak of persons.
i will attend to the judge, mayor, boards of aldermen, and
policemen, all in good time.
use your influence to reestablish system, order, government. you
may rest easy that no military commander is going to neglect
internal safety, or to guard against external danger; but to do
right requires time, and more patience than i usually possess. if i
find the press of memphis actuated by high principle and a sole
devotion to their country, i will be their best friend; but, if i
find them personal, abusive, dealing in innuendoes and hints at a
blind venture, and looking to their own selfish aggrandizement and
fame, then they had better look out; for i regard such persons as
greater enemies to their country and to mankind than the men who,
from a mistaken sense of state pride, have taken up muskets, and
fight us about as hard as we care about. in haste, but in kindness,
yours, etc.,
w. t. sherman, major-general.
memphis, tennessee, july , .
john park, mayor of memphis, present.
sir: yours of july th is before me, and has received, as all
similar papers ever will, my careful and most respectful
consideration. i have the most unbounded respect for the civil law,
courts, and authorities, and shall do all in my power to restore
them to their proper use, viz., the protection of life, liberty,
and property.
unfortunately, at this time, civil war prevails in the land, and
necessarily the military, for the time being, must be superior to
the civil authority, but it does not therefore destroy it. civil
courts and executive officers should still exist and perform
duties, without which civil or municipal bodies would soon pass
into disrespect—an end to be avoided. i am glad to find in
memphis a mayor and municipal authorities not only in existence,
but in the co-exercise of important functions, and i shall endeavor
to restore one or more civil tribunals for the arbitration of
contracts and punishment of crimes, which the military have neither
time nor inclination to interfere with. among these, first in
importance is the maintenance of order, peace, and quiet, within
the jurisdiction of memphis. to insure this, i will keep a strong
provost guard in the city, but will limit their duty to guarding
public property held or claimed by the united states, and for the
arrest and confinement of state prisoners and soldiers who are
disorderly or improperly away from their regiments. this guard
ought not to arrest citizens for disorder or minor crimes. this
should be done by the city police. i understand that the city
police is too weak in numbers to accomplish this perfectly, and i
therefore recommend that the city council at once take steps to
increase this force to a number which, in their judgment, day and
night can enforce your ordinances as to peace, quiet, and order; so
that any change in our military dispositions will not have a
tendency to leave your people unguarded. i am willing to instruct
the provost guard to assist the police force when any combination
is made too strong for them to overcome; but the city police should
be strong enough for any probable contingency. the cost of
maintaining this police force must necessarily fall upon all
citizens equitably. i am not willing, nor do i think it good
policy, for the city authorities to collect the taxes belonging to
the state and county, as you recommend; for these would have to be
refunded. better meet the expenses at once by a new tax on all
interested. therefore, if you, on consultation with the proper
municipal body, will frame a good bill for the increase of your
police force, and for raising the necessary means for their support
and maintenance, i will approve it and aid you in the collection of
the tax. of course, i cannot suggest how this tax should be laid,
but i think that it should be made uniform on all interests, real
estate, and personal property, including money, and
merchandise.
all who are protected should share the expenses in proportion to
the interests involved. i am, with respect, your obedient
servant,
w. t. sherman, major-general commanding.
memphis, august , .
captain fitch, assistant quartermaster, memphis, tennessee.
sir: the duties devolving on the quartermaster of this post, in
addition to his legitimate functions, are very important and
onerous, and i am fully aware that the task is more than should
devolve on one man. i will endeavor to get you help in the person
of some commissioned officer, and, if possible, one under bond, as
he must handle large amounts of money in trust; but, for the
present, we most execute the duties falling to our share as well as
possible. on the subject of vacant houses, general grant's orders
are: "take possession of all vacant stores and houses in the city,
and have them rented at reasonable rates; rent to be paid monthly
in advance. these buildings, with their tenants, can be turned over
to proprietors on proof of loyalty; also take charge of such as
have been leased out by disloyal owners."
i understand that general grant takes the rents and profits of this
class of real property under the rules and laws of war, and not
under the confiscation act of congress; therefore the question of
title is not involved simply the possession, and the rents and
profits of houses belonging to our enemies, which are not vacant,
we hold in trust for them or the government, according to the
future decisions of the proper tribunals.
mr. mcdonald, your chief agent in renting and managing this
business, called on me last evening and left with me written
questions, which it would take a volume to answer and a webster to
elucidate; but as we can only attempt plain, substantial justice, i
will answer these questions as well as i can, briefly and to the
point.
first. when ground is owned by parties who have gone south, and
have leased the ground to parties now in the city who own the
improvements on the ground?
answer. the united states takes the rents due the owner of the
land; does not disturb the owner of the improvements.
second. when parties owning houses have gone south, and the tenant
has given his notes for the rent in advance?
answer. notes are mere evidence of the debt due landlord. the
tenant pays the rent to the quartermaster, who gives a bond of
indemnity against the notes representing the debt for the
particular rent.
third. when the tenant has expended several months' rent in repairs
on the house?
answer. of course, allow all such credits on reasonable proof and
showing.
fourth. when the owner has gone south, and parties here hold liens
on the property and are collecting the rents to satisfy their
liens?
answer. the rent of a house can only be mortgaged to a person in
possession. if a loyal tenant be in possession and claim the rent
from himself as due to himself on some other debt, allow it; but,
if not in actual possession of the property, rents are not good
liens for a debt, but must be paid to the quartermaster.
fifth. of parties claiming foreign protection?
answer. many claim foreign protection who are not entitled to it.
if they are foreign subjects residing for business in this,
country, they are entitled to consideration and protection so long
as they obey the laws of the country. if they occupy houses
belonging to absent rebels, they must pay rent to the
quarter-master. if they own property, they must occupy it by
themselves, tenants, or servants.
eighth. when houses are occupied and the owner has gone south,
leaving an agent to collect rent for his benefit?
answer. rent must be paid to the quartermaster. no agent can
collect and remit money south without subjecting himself to arrest
and trial for aiding and abetting the public enemy.
ninth.. when houses are owned by loyal citizens, but are
unoccupied?
answer. such should not be disturbed, but it would be well to
advise them to have some servant at the house to occupy it.
tenth. when parties who occupy the house are creditors of the
owner, who has gone south? answer. you only look to collection of
rents. any person who transmits money south is liable to arrest and
trial for aiding and abetting the enemy; but i do not think it our
business to collect debts other than rents.
eleventh. when the parties who own the property have left the city
under general hovey's order no. , but are in the immediate
neighborhood, on their plantations?
answer. it makes no difference where they are, so they are
absent.
twelfth. when movable property is found in stores that are
closed?
answer. the goods are security for the rent. if the owner of the
goods prefers to remove the goods to paying rent, he can do
so.
thirteenth. when the owner lives in town, and refuses to take the
oath of allegiance?
answer. if the house be occupied, it does not fall under the order.
if the house be vacant, it does. the owner can recover his property
by taking the oath.
all persons in memphis residing within our military lines are
presumed to be loyal, good citizens, and may at any moment be
called to serve on juries, posses comitatua, or other civil service
required by the constitution and laws of our country. should they
be called upon to do such duty, which would require them to
acknowledge their allegiance and subordination to the constitution
of the united states, it would then be too late to refuse. so long
as they remain quiet and conform to these laws, they are entitled
to protection in their property and lives.
we have nothing to do with confiscation. we only deal with
possession, and therefore the necessity of a strict accountability,
because the united states assumes the place of trustee, and must
account to the rightful owner for his property, rents, and profits.
in due season courts will be established to execute the laws, the
confiscation act included, when we will be relieved of this duty
and trust. until that time, every opportunity should be given to
the wavering and disloyal to return to their allegiance to the
constitution of their birth or adoption. i am, etc.,
major-general commanding.
memphis, tennessee, august ,
major-general grant, corinth, mississippi.
sir: in pursuance of your request that i should keep you advised of
matters of interest here, in addition to the purely official
matters, i now write.
i dispatched promptly the thirteen companies of cavalry, nine of
fourth illinois, and four of eleventh illinois, to their respective
destinations, punctually on the d instant, although the order was
only received on the d. i received at the same time, from colonel
dickey, the notice that the bridge over hatchie was burned, and
therefore i prescribed their order of march via bolivar. they
started at  m. of the d, and i have no news of them since. none
of the cavalry ordered to me is yet heard from.
the guerrillas have destroyed several bridges over wolf creek; one
at raleigh, on the road by which i had prescribed trade and travel
to and from the city. i have a strong guard at the lower bridge
over wolf river, by which we can reach the country to the north of
that stream; but, as the confederates have burned their own
bridges, i will hold them to my order, and allow no trade over any
other road than the one prescribed, using the lower or randolph
road for our own convenience. i am still satisfied there is no
large force of rebels anywhere in the neighborhood. all the navy
gunboats are below except the st. louis, which lies off the city.
when commodore davis passes down from cairo, i will try to see him,
and get him to exchange the st. louis for a fleeter boat not
iron-clad; one that can move up and down the river, to break up
ferry-boats and canoes, and to prevent all passing across the
river. of course, in spite of all our efforts, smuggling is carried
on. we occasionally make hauls of clothing, gold-lace, buttons,
etc., but i am satisfied that salt and arms are got to the interior
somehow. i have addressed the board of trade a letter on this
point, which will enable us to control it better.
you may have been troubled at hearing reports of drunkenness here.
there was some after pay-day, but generally all is as quiet and
orderly as possible. i traverse the city every day and night, and
assert that memphis is and has been as orderly a city as st. louis,
cincinnati, or new york.
before the city authorities undertook to license saloons, there was
as much whiskey here as now, and it would take all my command as
customhouse inspectors, to break open all the parcels and packages
containing liquor. i can destroy all groggeries and shops where
soldiers get liquor just as we would in st. louis.
the newspapers are accusing me of cruelty to the sick; as base a
charge as was ever made. i would not let the sanitary committee
carry off a boat-load of sick, because i have no right to. we have
good hospitals here, and plenty of them. our regimental hospitals
are in the camps of the men, and the sick do much better there than
in the general hospitals; so say my division surgeon and the
regimental surgeons. the civilian doctors would, if permitted, take
away our entire command. general curtis sends his sick up here, but
usually no nurses; and it is not right that nurses should be taken
from my command for his sick. i think that, when we are endeavoring
to raise soldiers and to instruct them, it is bad policy to keep
them at hospitals as attendants and nurses.
i send you dr. derby's acknowledgment that he gave the leave of
absence of which he was charged. i have placed him in arrest, in
obedience to general halleck's orders, but he remains in charge of
the overton hospital, which is not full of patients.
the state hospital also is not full, and i cannot imagine what dr.
derby wants with the female academy on vance street. i will see him
again, and now that he is the chief at overton hospital, i think he
will not want the academy. still, if he does, under your orders i
will cause it to be vacated by the children and sisters of mercy.
they have just advertised for more scholars, and will be sadly
disappointed. if, however, this building or any other be needed for
a hospital, it must be taken; but really, in my heart, i do not see
what possible chance there is, under present circumstances, of
filling with patients the two large hospitals now in use, besides
the one asked for. i may, however, be mistaken in the particular
building asked for by dr. derby, and will go myself to see.
the fort is progressing well, captain jenney having arrived.
sixteen heavy guns are received, with a large amount of shot and
shell, but the platforms are not yet ready; still, if occasion
should arise for dispatch, i can put a larger force to work.
captain prime, when here, advised that the work should proceed
regularly under the proper engineer officers and laborers. i am,
etc.,
w. t. sherman, major-general commanding.
memphis, tennessee, september , 
colonel j. c, kelton, assistant adjutant-general, headquarters of
the army, washington, d. c.
dear colonel: please acknowledge to the major-general commanding
the receipt by me of his letter, and convey to him my assurances
that i have promptly modified my first instructions about cotton,
so as to conform to his orders. trade in cotton is now free, but in
all else i endeavor so to control it that the enemy shall receive
no contraband goods, or any aid or comfort; still i feel sure that
the officers of steamboats are sadly tempted by high prices to land
salt and other prohibited articles at waypoints along the river.
this, too, in time will be checked. all seems well here and
hereabout; no large body of the enemy within striking distance. a
force of about two thousand, cavalry passed through grand junction
north last friday, and fell on a detachment of the bolivar army at
middleburg, the result of which is doubtless reported to you. as
soon as i heard of the movement, i dispatched a force to the
southeast by way of diversion, and am satisfied that the enemy's
infantry and artillery fell back in consequence behind the
tallahatchie. the weather is very hot, country very dry, and dust
as bad as possible. i hold my two divisions ready, with their
original complement of transportation, for field service. of course
all things most now depend on events in front of washington and in
kentucky. the gunboat eastport and four transports loaded with
prisoners of war destined for vicksburg have been lying before
memphis for two days, but are now steaming up to resume their
voyage. our fort progresses well, but our guns are not yet mounted.
the engineers are now shaping the banquette to receive platforms. i
expect captain prime from corinth in two or three days.
i am, with great respect, yours,
w. t. sherman, major-general commanding.
memphis, tennessee, september , 
editor bulletin.
sir: your comments on the recent orders of generals halleck and
mcclellan afford the occasion appropriate for me to make public the
fact that there is a law of congress, as old as our government
itself, but reenacted on the th of april, , and in force ever
since. that law reads:
"all officers and soldiers are to behave themselves orderly in
quarters and on the march; and whoever shall commit any waste or
spoil, either in walks of trees, parks, warrens, fish-ponds, houses
and gardens, cornfields, inclosures or meadows, or shall
maliciously destroy any property whatever belonging to the
inhabitants of the united states, unless by order of the
commander-in-chief of the armies of said united states, shall
(besides such penalties as they are liable to by law) be punished
according to the nature and degree of the offense, by the judgment
of a general or regimental court-martial."
such is the law of congress; and the orders of the
commander-in-chief are, that officers or soldiers convicted of
straggling and pillaging shall be punished with death. these orders
have not come to me officially, but i have seen them in newspapers,
and am satisfied that they express the determination of the
commander-in-chief. straggling and pillaging have ever been great
military crimes; and every officer and soldier in my command knows
what stress i have laid upon them, and that, so far as in my power
lies, i will punish them to the full extent of the law and
orders.
the law is one thing, the execution of the law another. god himself
has commanded: "thou shalt not kill," "thou shalt not steal," "thou
shalt not covet thy neighbor's goods," etc. will any one say these
things are not done now as well as before these laws were announced
at sinai. i admit the law to be that "no officer or soldier of the
united states shall commit waste or destruction of cornfields,
orchards, potato-patches, or any kind of pillage on the property of
friend or foe near memphis," and that i stand prepared to execute
the law as far as possible.
no officer or soldier should enter the house or premises of any
peaceable citizen, no matter what his politics, unless on business;
and no such officer or soldier can force an entrance unless he have
a written order from a commanding officer or provost-marshal, which
written authority must be exhibited if demanded. when property such
as forage, building or other materials are needed by the united
states, a receipt will be given by the officer taking them, which
receipt should be presented to the quartermaster, who will
substitute therefor a regular voucher, to be paid-according to the
circumstances of the case. if the officer refuse to give such
receipt, the citizen may fairly infer that the property is
wrongfully taken, and he should, for his own protection, ascertain
the name, rank, and regiment of the officer, and report him in
writing. if any soldier commits waste or destruction, the person
whose property is thus wasted must find out the name, company, and
regiment of the actual transgressor. in order to punish there must
be a trial, and there must be testimony. it is not sufficient that
a general accusation be made, that soldiers are doing this or that.
i cannot punish my whole command, or a whole battalion, because one
or two bad soldiers do wrong. the punishment must reach the
perpetrators, and no one can identify them as well as the party who
is interested. the state of tennessee does not hold itself
responsible for acts of larceny committed by her citizens, nor does
the united staten or any other nation. these are individual acts of
wrong, and punishment can only be inflicted on the wrong-doer. i
know the difficulty of identifying particular soldiers, but
difficulties do not alter the importance of principles of justice.
they should stimulate the parties to increase their efforts to find
out the actual perpetrators of the crime.
colonels of regiments and commanders of corps are liable to severe
punishment for permitting their men to leave their camps to commit
waste or destruction; but i know full well that many of the acts
attributed to soldiers are committed by citizens and negroes, and
are charged to soldiers because of a desire to find fault with
them; but this only reacts upon the community and increases the
mischief. while every officer would willingly follow up an
accusation against any one or more of his men whose names or
description were given immediately after the discovery of the act,
he would naturally resent any general charge against his good men,
for the criminal conduct of a few bad ones.
i have examined into many of the cases of complaint made in this
general way, and have felt mortified that our soldiers should do
acts which are nothing more or less than stealing, but i was
powerless without some clew whereby to reach the rightful party. i
know that the great mass of our soldiers would scorn to steal or
commit crime, and i will not therefore entertain vague and general
complaints, but stand, prepared always to follow up any reasonable
complaint when the charge is definite and the names of witnesses
furnished.
i know, moreover, in some instances when our soldiers are
complained of, that they have been insulted by sneering remarks
about "yankees," "northern barbarians," "lincoln's hirelings," etc.
people who use such language must seek redress through some one
else, for i will not tolerate insults to our country or cause. when
people forget their obligations to a government that made them
respected among the nations of the earth, and speak contemptuously
of the flag which is the silent emblem of that country, i will not
go out of my way to protect them or their property. i will punish
the soldiers for trespass or waste if adjudged by a court-martial,
because they disobey orders; but soldiers are men and citizens as
well as soldiers, and should promptly resent any insult to their
country, come from what quarter it may. i mention this phase
because it is too common. insult to a soldier does not justify
pillage, but it takes from the officer the disposition he would
otherwise feel to follow up the inquiry and punish the
wrong-doers.
again, armies in motion or stationary must commit some waste.
flankers must let down fences and cross fields; and, when an attack
is contemplated or apprehended, a command will naturally clear the
ground of houses, fences, and trees. this is waste, but is the
natural consequence of war, chargeable on those who caused the war.
so in fortifying a place, dwelling-houses must be taken, materials
used, even wasted, and great damage done, which in the end may
prove useless. this, too, is an expense not chargeable to us, but
to those who made the war; and generally war is destruction and
nothing else.
we must bear this in mind, that however peaceful things look, we
are really at war; and much that looks like waste or destruction is
only the removal of objects that obstruct our fire, or would afford
cover to an enemy.
this class of waste must be distinguished from the wanton waste
committed by army-stragglers, which is wrong, and can be punished
by the death-penalty if proper testimony can be produced.
yours, etc.,
w. t. sherman, major-general commanding.
satisfied that, in the progress of the war, memphis would become
an important depot, i pushed forward the construction of fort
pickering, kept most of the troops in camps back of the city, and
my own headquarters remained in tents on the edge of the city, near
mr. moon's house, until, on the approach of winter, mrs. sherman
came down with the children to visit me, when i took a house nearer
the fort.
all this time battalion and brigade drills were enforced, so
that, when the season approached for active operations farther
south, i had my division in the best possible order, and about the
st of november it was composed as follows:
first brigade, brigadier-general m. l. smith—eighth missouri,
colonel g. a. smith; sixth missouri, colonel peter e. bland; one
hundred and thirteenth illinois, colonel george b. hoge;
fifty-fourth ohio, colonel t. kilby smith; one hundred and
twentieth illinois, colonel g. w. mckeaig.
second brigade, colonel john adair mcdowell.—sixth iowa,
lieutenant-colonel john m. corse; fortieth illinois, colonel j. w.
booth; forty-sixth ohio, colonel o. c. walcutt; thirteenth united
states infantry, first battalion, major d. chase.
third brigade, brigadier-general j. w. denver.—forty-eighth
ohio, colonel p. j. sullivan; fifty-third ohio, colonel w. s.
jones; seventieth ohio, colonel j. r. cockerill.
fourth brigade, colonel david stuart.—fifty-fifth illinois,
colonel o. malmburg; fifty-seventh ohio, colonel w. mungen;
eighty-third indiana, colonel b. spooner; one hundred and sixteenth
illinois, colonel tupper; one hundred and twenty-seventh illinois,
lieutenant-colonel eldridge.
fifth brigade, colonel r. p. buckland.—seventy-second ohio,
lieutenant-colonel d. w. c. loudon; thirty-second wisconsin,
colonel j. w. howe; ninety-third indiana, colonel thomas;
ninety-third illinois, major j. m. fisher.
subsequently, brigadier-general j. g. lauman arrived at memphis,
and i made up a sixth brigade, and organized these six brigades
into three divisions, under brigadier-generals m. l. smith, j. w.
denver, and j. g. lauman.
about the th of november i received an order from general
grant, dated:
lagrange, november , .
meet me at columbus, kentucky, on thursday next. if you have a good
map of the country south of you, take it up with you.
u. s. grant, major-general.
i started forthwith by boat, and met general grant, who had
reached columbus by the railroad from jackson, tennessee. he
explained to me that he proposed to move against pemberton, then
intrenched on a line behind the tallahatchie river below holly
springs; that he would move on holly springs and abberville, from
grand junction; that mcpherson, with the troops at corinth, would
aim to make junction with him at holly springs; and that he wanted
me to leave in memphis a proper garrison, and to aim for the
tallahatchie, so as to come up on his right by a certain date. he
further said that his ultimate object was to capture vicksburg, to
open the navigation of the mississippi river, and that general
halleck had authorized him to call on the troops in the department
of arkansas, then commanded by general s. r. curtis, for
cooperation. i suggested to him that if he would request general
curtis to send an expedition from some point on the mississippi,
near helena, then held in force, toward grenada, to the rear of
pemberton, it would alarm him for the safety of his communications,
and would assist us materially in the proposed attack on his front.
he authorized me to send to the commanding officer at helena a
request to that effect, and, as soon as i reached memphis, i
dispatched my aide, major mccoy, to helena, who returned, bringing
me a letter from general frederick steele, who had just reached
helena with osterhaus's division, and who was temporarily in
command, general curtis having gone to st. louis. this letter
contained the assurance that he "would send from friar's point a
large force under brigadier-general a. p. hovey in the direction of
grenada, aiming to reach the tallahatchie at charleston, on the
next monday, tuesday, or wednesday (december st) at furthest." my
command was appointed to start on wednesday, november th, and
meantime major-general s. a. hurlbut, having reported for duty, was
assigned to the command of memphis, with four regiments of infantry
one battery of artillery, two companies of thielman's cavalry and
the certain prospect of soon receiving a number of new regiments,
known to be en route.
i marched out of memphis punctually with three small divisions,
taking different roads till we approached the tallahatchie, when we
converged on wyatt to cross the river, there a bold, deep stream,
with a newly-constructed fort behind. i had grierson's sixth
illinois cavalry with me, and with it opened communication with
general grant when we were abreast of holly springs. we reached
wyatt on the d day of december without the least opposition, and
there learned that pemberton's whole army had fallen back to the
yalabusha near grenada, in a great measure by reason of the
exaggerated reports concerning the helena force, which had reached
charleston; and some of general hovey's cavalry, under general
washburn, having struck the railroad in the neighborhood of
coffeeville, naturally alarmed general pemberton for the safety of
his communications, and made him let go his tallahatchie line with
all the forts which he had built at great cost in labor. we had to
build a bridge at wyatt, which consumed a couple of days, and on
the th of december my whole command was at college hill, ten miles
from oxford, whence i reported to general grant in oxford.
on the th i received the following letter:
oxford mississippi, december , —morning
general sherman, college hill.
dear general: the following is a copy of dispatch just received
from washington:
washington, december , —m
general grant:
the capture of grenada may change our plans in regard to vicksburg.
you will move your troops as you may deem best to accomplish the
great object in view. you will retain, till further orders, all
troops of general curtis now in your department. telegraph to
general allen in st. louis for all steamboats you may require. ask
porter to cooperate. telegraph what are your present plans.
h. w. halleck, general-in.-chief.
i wish you would come over this evening and stay to-night, or come
in the morning. i would like to talk with you about this matter. my
notion is to send two divisions back to memphis, and fix upon a day
when they should effect a landing, and press from here with this
command at the proper time to cooperate. if i do not do this i will
move our present force to grenada, including steele's, repairing
road as we proceed, and establish a depot of provisions there. when
a good ready is had, to move immediately on jackson, mississippi,
cutting loose from the road. of the two plans i look most favorably
on the former.
come over and we will talk this matter over. yours truly,
u. s. grant, major-general.
i repaired at once to oxford, and found general grant in a large
house with all his staff, and we discussed every possible chance.
he explained to me that large reenforcements had been promised,
which would reach memphis very soon, if not already there; that the
entire gunboat fleet, then under the command of admiral d. d.
porter, would cooperate; that we could count on a full division
from the troops at helena; and he believed that, by a prompt
movement, i could make a lodgment up the yazoo and capture
vicksburg from the rear; that its garrison was small, and he, at
oxford, would so handle his troops as to hold pemberton away from
vicksburg. i also understood that, if pemberton should retreat
south, he would follow him up, and would expect to find me at the
yazoo river, if not inside of vicksburg. i confess, at that moment
i did not dream that general mcclernand, or anybody else, was
scheming for the mere honor of capturing vicksburg. we knew at the
time that general butler had been reenforced by general banks at
new orleans, and the latter was supposed to be working his way
up-stream from new orleans, while we were working down. that day
general grant dispatched to general halleck, in washington, as
follows:
oxford, december , .
major-general h. w. halleck, washington, d. c.:
general sherman will command the expedition down the mississippi.
he will have a force of about forty thousand men; will land above
vicksburg (up the yazoo, if practicable), and out the mississippi
central road and the road running east from vicksburg, where they
cross black river. i will cooperate from here, my movements
depending on those of the enemy. with the large cavalry force now
at my command, i will be able to have them show themselves at
different points on the tallahatchie and yalabusha; and, when an
opportunity occurs, make a real attack. after cutting the two
roads, general sherman's movements to secure the end desired will
necessarily be left to his judgment.
i will occupy this road to coffeeville.
u. s. grant, major-general.
i was shown this dispatch before it was sent, and afterward the
general drew up for me the following letter of instructions in his
own handwriting, which i now possess:
oxford, mississippi, december , .
major-general w. t. sherman, commanding right wing army in the
field, present.
general: you will proceed with as little delay as practicable to
memphis, tennessee, taking with you one division of your present
command. on your arrival at memphis you will assume command of all
the troops there, and that portion of general curtis's forces at
present east of the mississippi river, and organize them into
brigades and divisions in your own way.
as soon as possible move with them down the river to the vicinity
of vicksburg, and, with the cooperation of the gunboat fleet under
command of flag-officer porter, proceed to the reduction of that
place in such manner as circumstances and your own judgment may
dictate.
the amount of rations, forage, land transportation, etc., necessary
to take, will be left entirely to yourself.
the quartermaster in st. louis will be instructed to send you
transportation for thirty thousand men. should you still find
yourself deficient, your quartermaster will be authorized to make
up the deficiency from such transports as may come into the port of
memphis.
on arriving in memphis put yourself in communication with admiral
porter, and arrange with him for his cooperation.
inform me at the earliest practicable day of the time when you will
embark, and such plans as may then be matured. i will hold the
forces here in readiness to cooperate with you in such manner as
the movements of the enemy may make necessary.
leave the district of memphis in the command of an efficient
officer and with a garrison of four regiments of infantry, the
siege-guns, and what ever cavalry force may be there.
one regiment of infantry and at least a section of artillery will
also be left at friar's point or delta, to protect the stores of
the cavalry post that will be left there. yours truly,
u. s. grant, major-general.
i also insert here another letter, dated the th instant, sent
afterward to me at memphis, which completes all instructions
received by me governing the first movement against
vicksburg:
oxford, mississippi, december , 
major-general sherman, commanding, etc.,
memphis, tennessee.
i have not had one word from grierson since he left, and am getting
uneasy about him. i hope general gorman will give you no difficulty
about retaining the troops on this side the river, and steele to
command them. the twenty-one thousand men you have, with the twelve
thousand from helena, will make a good force. the enemy are as yet
on the yalabusha. i am pushing down on them slowly, but so as to
keep up the impression of a continuous move. i feel particularly
anxious to have the helena cavalry on this side of the river; if
not now, at least after you start. if gorman will send them,
instruct them where to go and how to communicate with me. my
headquarters will probably be in coffeeville one week hence.... in
the mean time i will order transportation, etc.... it would be well
if you could have two or three small boats suitable for navigating
the yazoo. it may become necessary for me to look to that base for
supplies before we get through....
u. s. grant, major-general.
when we rode to oxford from college hill, there happened a
little circumstance which seems worthy of record. while general van
dorn had his headquarters in holly springs, viz., in october, ,
he was very short of the comforts and luxuries of life, and
resorted to every possible device to draw from the abundant
supplies in memphis. he had no difficulty whatever in getting spies
into the town for information, but he had trouble in getting bulky
supplies out through our guards, though sometimes i connived at his
supplies of cigars, liquors, boots, gloves, etc., for his
individual use; but medicines and large supplies of all kinds were
confiscated, if attempted to be passed out. as we rode that morning
toward oxford, i observed in a farmer's barn-yard a wagon that
looked like a city furniture-wagon with springs. we were always
short of wagons, so i called the attention of the quartermaster,
colonel j. condit smith, saying, "there is a good wagon; go for
it." he dropped out of the retinue with an orderly, and after we
had ridden a mile or so he overtook us, and i asked him, "what
luck?" he answered, "all right; i have secured that wagon, and i
also got another," and explained that he had gone to the farmer's
house to inquire about the furniture-wagon, when the farmer said it
did not belong to him, but to some party in memphis, adding that in
his barn was another belonging to the same party. they went to the
barn, and there found a handsome city hearse, with pall and plumes.
the farmer said they had had a big funeral out of memphis, but when
it reached his house, the coffin was found to contain a fine
assortment of medicines for the use of van dorn's army. thus under
the pretense of a first-class funeral, they had carried through our
guards the very things we had tried to prevent. it was a good
trick, but diminished our respect for such pageants afterward.
as soon as i was in possession of general grant's instructions
of december th, with a further request that i should dispatch
colonel grierson, with his cavalry, across by land to helena, to
notify general steele of the general plan, i returned to college
hill, selected the division of brigadier-general morgan l. smith to
return with me to memphis; started grierson on his errand to
helena, and ordered generals denver and lauman to report to general
grant for further orders. we started back by the most direct route,
reached memphis by noon of december th, and began immediately the
preparations for the vicksburg movement. there i found two
irregular divisions which had arrived at memphis in my absence,
commanded respectively by brigadier-general a. j. smith and
brigadier-general george w. morgan. these were designated the first
and third divisions, leaving the second division of morgan z. smith
to retain its original name and number.
i also sent orders, in the name of general grant, to general
gorman, who meantime had replaced general steele in command of
helena, in lieu of the troops which had been east of the
mississippi and had returned, to make up a strong division to
report to me on my way down. this division was accordingly
organized, and was commanded by brigadier-general frederick steele,
constituting my fourth division.
meantime a large fleet of steamboats was assembling from st.
louis and cairo, and admiral porter dropped down to memphis with
his whole gunboat fleet, ready to cooperate in the movement. the
preparations were necessarily hasty in the extreme, but this was
the essence of the whole plan, viz., to reach vicksburg as it were
by surprise, while general grant held in check pemberton's army
about grenada, leaving me to contend only with the smaller garrison
of vicksburg and its well-known strong batteries and defenses. on
the th the memphis troops were embarked, and steamed down to
helena, where on the st general steele's division was also
embarked; and on the d we were all rendezvoused at friar's point,
in the following order, viz.:
steamer forest queen, general headquarters, and battalion
thirteenth united states infantry.
first division, brigadier-general a. j. smith.—steamers des
arc, division headquarters and escort; metropolitan, sixth indiana;
j. h. dickey, twenty-third wisconsin; j. c. snow, sixteenth
indiana; hiawatha, ninety-sixth ohio; j. s. pringle, sixty-seventh
indiana; j. w. cheeseman, ninth kentucky; r. campbell,
ninety-seventh indiana; duke of argyle, seventy-seventh illinois;
city of alton, one hundred and eighth and forty-eighth ohio; city
of louisiana, mercantile battery; ohio belle, seventeenth ohio
battery; citizen, eighty-third ohio; champion, commissary-boat;
general anderson, ordnance.
second division,, brigadier-general m. l. smith.—steamers
chancellor, headquarters, and thielman's cavalry; planet, one
hundred and sixteenth illinois; city of memphis, batteries a and b
(missouri artillery), eighth missouri, and section of parrott guns;
omaha, fifty-seventh ohio; sioux city, eighty-third indiana; spread
eagle, one hundred and twenty-seventh illinois; ed. walsh, one
hundred and thirteenth illinois; westmoreland, fifty-fifth
illinois, headquarters fourth brigade; sunny south, fifty-fourth
ohio; universe, sixth missouri; robert allen,
commissary-boat.
third division, brigadier-general g. w. morgan.—steamers
empress, division headquarters; key west, one hundred and
eighteenth illinois; sam gaty, sixty-ninth indiana; northerner, one
hundred and twentieth ohio; belle peoria, headquarters second
brigade, two companies forty-ninth ohio, and pontoons; die vernon,
third kentucky; war eagle, forty-ninth indiana (eight companies),
and foster's battery; henry von phul, headquarters third brigade,
and eight companies sixteenth ohio; fanny bullitt, one hundred and
fourteenth ohio, and lamphere's battery; crescent city,
twenty-second kentucky and fifty-fourth indiana; des moines,
forty-second ohio; pembina, lamphere's and stone's batteries; lady
jackson, commissary-boat.
fourth division, brigadier-general frederick steele—steamers
continental, headquarters, escort and battery; john j. roe, fourth
and ninth iowa; nebraska, thirty-first iowa; key west, first iowa
artillery; john warner, thirteenth illinois; tecumseh, twenty-sixth
iowa; decatur, twenty-eighth iowa; quitman, thirty-fourth iowa;
kennett, twenty ninth missouri; gladiator, thirtieth missouri;
isabella, thirty-first missouri; d. g. taylor, quartermaster's
stores and horses; sucker state, thirty-second missouri; dakota,
third missouri; tutt, twelfth missouri emma, seventeenth missouri;
adriatic, first missouri; meteor, seventy-sixth ohio; polar star,
fifty-eighth ohio.
at the same time were communicated the following
instructions:
headquarters right wing, thirteenth army corps forest queen,
december , .
to commanders of divisions, generals f. steele, george w. morgan,
a.j. smith, and m. l. smith
with this i hand to each of you a copy of a map, compiled from the
best sources, and which in the main is correct. it is the same used
by admiral porter and myself. complete military success can only be
accomplished by united action on some general plan, embracing
usually a large district of country. in the present instance, our
object is to secure the navigation of the mississippi river and its
main branches, and to hold them as military channels of
communication and for commercial purposes. the river, above
vicksburg, has been gained by conquering the country to its rear,
rendering its possession by our enemy useless and unsafe to him,
and of great value to us. but the enemy still holds the river from
vicksburg to baton rouge, navigating it with his boats, and the
possession of it enables him to connect his communications and
routes of supply, east and west. to deprive him of this will be a
severe blow, and, if done effectually, will be of great advantage
to us, and probably, the most decisive act of the war. to
accomplish this important result we are to act our part—an
important one of the great whole. general banks, with a large
force, has reinforced general butler in louisiana, and from that
quarter an expedition, by water and land, is coming northward.
general grant, with the thirteenth army corps, of which we compose
the right wing, is moving southward. the naval squadron (admiral
porter) is operating with his gunboat fleet by water, each in
perfect harmony with the other.
general grant's left and centre were at last accounts approaching
the yalabusha, near grenada, and the railroad to his rear, by which
he drew his supplies, was reported to be seriously damaged. this
may disconcert him somewhat, but only makes more important our line
of operations. at the yalabusha general grant may encounter the
army of general pemberton, the same which refused him battle on the
line of the tallahatchie, which was strongly fortified; but, as he
will not have time to fortify it, he will hardly stand there; and,
in that event, general grant will immediately advance down the high
ridge between the big black and yazoo, and will expect to meet us
on the yazoo and receive from us the supplies which he needs, and
which he knows we carry along. parts of this general plan are to
cooperate with the naval squadron in the reduction of vicksburg; to
secure possession of the land lying between the yazoo and big
black; and to act in concert with general grant against pemberton's
forces, supposed to have jackson, mississippi, as a point of
concentration. vicksburg is doubtless very strongly fortified, both
against the river and land approaches. already the gunboats have
secured the yazoo up for twenty-three miles, to a fort on the yazoo
at haines's bluff, giving us a choice for a landing-place at some
point up the yazoo below this fort, or on the island which lies
between vicksburg and the present mouth of the yazoo. (see map [b,
c, d], johnson's plantation.)
but, before any actual collision with the enemy, i purpose, after
our whole land force is rendezvoused at gaines's landing, arkansas,
to proceed in order to milliken's bend (a), and there dispatch a
brigade, without wagons or any incumbrances whatever, to the
vicksburg & shreveport railroad (at h and k), to destroy that
effectually, and to cut off that fruitful avenue of supply; then to
proceed to the mouth of the yazoo, and, after possessing ourselves
of the latest and most authentic information from naval officers
now there, to land our whole force on the mississippi side, and
then to reach the point where the vicksburg & jackson railroad
crosses the big black (f); after which to attack vicksburg by land,
while the gun-boats assail it by water. it may be necessary
(looking to grant's approach), before attacking vicksburg, to
reduce the battery at haine's bluff first, so as to enable some of
the lighter gunboats and transports to ascend the yazoo and
communicate with general grant. the detailed manner of
accomplishing all these results will be communicated in due season,
and these general points are only made known at this time, that
commanders may study the maps, and also that in the event of
non-receipt of orders all may act in perfect concert by following
the general movement, unless specially detached.
you all now have the same map, so that no mistakes or confusion
need result from different names of localities. all possible
preparations as to wagons, provisions, axes, and intrenching-tools,
should be made in advance, so that when we do land there will be no
want of them. when we begin to act on shore, we must do the work
quickly and effectually. the gunboats under admiral porter will do
their full share, and i feel every assurance that the army will not
fall short in its work.
division commanders may read this to regimental commanders, and
furnish brigade commanders a copy. they should also cause as many
copies of the map to be made on the same scale as possible, being
very careful in copying the names.
the points marked e and g (allan's and mount albans) are evidently
strategical points that will figure in our future operations, and
these positions should be well studied.
i am, with great respect, your obedient servant,
w. t. sherman, major-general.
the mississippi boats were admirably calculated for handling
troops, horses, guns, stores, etc., easy of embarkation and
disembarkation, and supplies of all kinds were abundant, except
fuel. for this we had to rely on wood, but most of the wood-yards,
so common on the river before the war, had been exhausted, so that
we had to use fence-rails, old dead timber, the logs of houses,
etc. having abundance of men and plenty of axes, each boat could
daily procure a supply.
in proceeding down the river, one or more of admiral porter's
gunboats took the lead; others were distributed throughout the
column, and some brought up the rear. we manoeuvred by divisions
and brigades when in motion, and it was a magnificent sight as we
thus steamed down the river. what few inhabitants remained at the
plantations on the river-bank were unfriendly, except the slaves;
some few guerrilla-parties infested the banks, but did not dare to
molest so, strong a force as i then commanded.
we reached milliken's bend on christmas-day, when i detached one
brigade (burbridge's), of a. j. smith's division, to the southwest,
to break up the railroad leading from vicksburg toward shreveport,
louisiana. leaving a. j. smith's division there to await the return
of burbridge, the remaining three divisions proceeded, on the th,
to the mouth of the yazoo, and up that river to johnson's
plantation, thirteen miles, and there disembarked steele's division
above the mouth of chickasaw bayou, morgans division near the house
of johnson (which had been burned by the gunboats on a former
occasion), and m. l. smith's just below. a. j. smith's division
arrived the next night, and disembarked below that of m. l. smith.
the place of our disembarkation was in fact an island, separated
from the high bluff known as walnut hills, on which the town of
vicksburg stands, by a broad and shallow bayou-evidently an old
channel of the yazoo. on our right was another wide bayou, known as
old river; and on the left still another, much narrower, but too
deep to be forded, known as chickasaw bayou. all the island was
densely wooded, except johnson's plantation, immediately on the
bank of the yazoo, and a series of old cotton-fields along
chickasaw bayou. there was a road from johnson's plantation
directly to vicksburg, but it crossed numerous bayous and deep
swamps by bridges, which had been destroyed; and this road
debouched on level ground at the foot of the vicksburg bluff,
opposite strong forts, well prepared and defended by heavy
artillery. on this road i directed general a. j. smith's division,
not so much by way of a direct attack as a diversion and
threat.
morgan was to move to his left, to reach chickasaw bayou, and to
follow it toward the bluff, about four miles above a. j. smith.
steele was on morgan's left, across chickasaw bayou, and m. l.
smith on morgan's right. we met light resistance at all points, but
skirmished, on the th, up to the main bayou, that separated our
position from the bluffs of vicksburg, which were found to be
strong by nature and by art, and seemingly well defended. on
reconnoitring the front in person, during the th and th, i
became satisfied that general a. j. smith could not cross the
intervening obstacles under the heavy fire of the forts immediately
in his front, and that the main bayou was impassable, except at two
points—one near the head of chickasaw bayou, in front of
morgan, and the other about a mile lower down, in front of m. l.
smith's division.
during the general reconnoissance of the th general morgan l.
smith received a severe and dangerous wound in his hip, which
completely disabled him and compelled him to go to his steamboat,
leaving the command of his division to brigadier general d. stuart;
but i drew a part of general a. j. smith's division, and that
general himself, to the point selected for passing the bayou, and
committed that special task to his management.
general steele reported that it was physically impossible to
reach the bluffs from his position, so i ordered him to leave but a
show of force there, and to return to the west side of chickasaw
bayou in support of general morgan's left. he had to countermarch
and use the steamboats in the yazoo to get on the firm ground on
our side of the chickasaw.
on the morning of december th all the troops were ready and in
position. the first step was to make a lodgment on the foot-hills
and bluffs abreast of our position, while diversions were made by
the navy toward haines's bluff, and by the first division directly
toward vicksburg. i estimated the enemy's forces, then strung from
vicksburg to haines's bluff, at fifteen thousand men, commanded by
the rebel generals martin luther smith and stephen d. lee. aiming
to reach firm ground beyond this bayou, and to leave as little time
for our enemy to reenforce as possible, i determined to make a show
of attack along the whole front, but to break across the bayou at
the two points named, and gave general orders accordingly. i
pointed out to general morgan the place where he could pass the
bayou, and he answered, "general, in ten minutes after you give the
signal i'll be on those hills." he was to lead his division in
person, and was to be supported by steele's division. the front was
very narrow, and immediately opposite, at the base of the hills
about three hundred yards from the bayou, was a rebel battery,
supported by an infantry force posted on the spurs of the hill
behind. to draw attention from this, the real point of attack, i
gave instructions to commence the attack at the flanks.
i went in person about a mile to the right rear of morgan's
position, at a place convenient to receive reports from all other
parts of the line; and about noon of december th gave the orders
and signal for the main attack. a heavy artillery-fire opened along
our whole line, and was replied to by the rebel batteries, and soon
the infantry-fire opened heavily, especially on a. j. smith's
front, and in front of general george w. morgan. one brigade
(decourcey's) of morgan's troops crossed the bayou safely, but took
to cover behind the bank, and could not be moved forward. frank
blairs brigade, of steele's division, in support, also crossed the
bayou, passed over the space of level ground to the foot of the
hills; but, being unsupported by morgan, and meeting a very severe
cross-fire of artillery, was staggered and gradually fell back,
leaving about five hundred men behind, wounded and prisoners; among
them colonel thomas fletcher, afterward governor of missouri. part
of thayer's brigade took a wrong direction, and did not cross the
bayou at all; nor did general morgan cross in person. this attack
failed; and i have always felt that it was due to the failure of
general g. w. morgan to obey his orders, or to fulfill his promise
made in person. had he used with skill and boldness one of his
brigades, in addition to that of blair's, he could have made a
lodgment on the bluff, which would have opened the door for our
whole force to follow. meantime the sixth missouri infantry, at
heavy loss, had also crossed the bayou at the narrow passage lower
down, but could not ascend the steep bank; right over their heads
was a rebel battery, whose fire was in a measure kept down by our
sharp-shooters (thirteenth united states infantry) posted behind
logs, stumps, and trees, on our side of the bayou.
the men of the sixth missouri actually scooped out with their
hands caves in the bank, which sheltered them against the fire of
the enemy, who, right over their heads, held their muskets outside
the parapet vertically, and fired down so critical was the
position, that we could not recall the men till after dark, and
then one at a time. our loss had been pretty heavy, and we had
accomplished nothing, and had inflicted little loss on our enemy.
at first i intended to renew the assault, but soon became satisfied
that, the enemy's attention having been drawn to the only two
practicable points, it would prove too costly, and accordingly
resolved to look elsewhere for a point below haines's bluff, or
blake's plantation. that night i conferred with admiral porter, who
undertook to cover the landing; and the next day (december th)
the boats were all selected, but so alarmed were the captains and
pilots, that we had to place sentinels with loaded muskets to
insure their remaining at their posts. under cover of night,
steele's division, and one brigade of stuart's, were drawn out of
line, and quietly embarked on steamboats in the yazoo river. the
night of december th was appointed for this force, under the
command of general fred steele, to proceed up the yazoo just below
haines's bluff, there to disembark about daylight, and make a dash
for the hills. meantime we had strengthened our positions near
chickasaw bayou, had all our guns in good position with parapets,
and had every thing ready to renew our attack as soon as we heard
the sound of battle above.
at midnight i left admiral porter on his gunboat; he had his
fleet ready and the night was propitious. i rode back to camp and
gave orders for all to be ready by daybreak; but when daylight came
i received a note from general steele reporting that, before his
boats had got up steam, the fog had settled down on the river so
thick and impenetrable, that it was simply impossible to move; so
the attempt had to be abandoned. the rain, too, began to fall, and
the trees bore water-marks ten feet above our heads, so that i
became convinced that the part of wisdom was to withdraw. i ordered
the stores which had been landed to be reembarked on the boats, and
preparations made for all the troops to regain their proper boats
during the night of the st of january, . from our camps at
chickasaw we could hear, the whistles of the trains arriving in
vicksburg, could see battalions of men marching up toward haines's
bluff, and taking post at all points in our front. i was more than
convinced that heavy reenforcements were coming to vicksburg;
whether from pemberton at grenada, bragg in tennessee, or from
other sources, i could not tell; but at no point did the enemy
assume the offensive; and when we drew off our rear-guard, on the
morning of the d, they simply followed up the movement, timidly.
up to that moment i had not heard a word from general grant since
leaving memphis; and most assuredly i had listened for days for the
sound of his guns in the direction of yazoo city. on the morning of
january d, all my command were again afloat in their proper
steamboats, when admiral porter told me that general mcclernand had
arrived at the mouth of the yazoo in the steamboat tigress, and
that it was rumored he had come down to supersede me. leaving my
whole force where it was, i ran down to the month of the yazoo in a
small tug boat, and there found general mcclernand, with orders
from the war department to command the expeditionary force on the
mississippi river. i explained what had been done, and what was the
actual state of facts; that the heavy reenforcements pouring into
vicksburg must be pemberton's army, and that general grant must be
near at hand. he informed me that general grant was not coming at
all; that his depot at holly springs had been captured by van dorn,
and that he had drawn back from coffeeville and oxford to holly
springs and lagrange; and, further, that quinby's division of
grant's army was actually at memphis for stores when he passed
down. this, then, fully explained how vicksburg was being
reenforced. i saw that any attempt on the place from the yazoo was
hopeless; and, with general mcclernand's full approval, we all came
out of the yazoo, and on the d of january rendezvoused at
milliken's bend, about ten miles above. on the th general
mcclernand issued his general order no. , assuming command of the
army of the mississippi, divided into two corps; the first to be
commanded by general morgan, composed of his own and a. j. smith's
divisions; and the second, composed of steele's and stuart's
divisions, to be commanded by me. up to that time the army had been
styled the right wing of (general grant's) thirteenth army corps,
and numbered about thirty thousand men. the aggregate loss during
the time of any command, mostly on the th of december, was one
hundred and seventy-five killed, nine hundred and thirty wounded,
and seven hundred and forty-three prisoners. according to badeau,
the rebels lost sixty-three killed, one hundred and thirty-four
wounded, and ten prisoners. it afterward transpired that van dorn
had captured holly springs on the th of december, and that
general grant fell back very soon after. general pemberton, who had
telegraphic and railroad communication with vicksburg, was
therefore at perfect liberty to reenforce the place with a garrison
equal, if not superior, to my command. the rebels held high,
commanding ground, and could see every movement of our men and
boats, so that the only possible hope of success consisted in
celerity and surprise, and in general grant's holding all of
pemberton's army hard pressed meantime. general grant was perfectly
aware of this, and had sent me word of the change, but it did not
reach me in time; indeed, i was not aware of it until after my
assault of december th, and until the news was brought me by
general mcclernand as related. general mcclernand was appointed to
this command by president lincoln in person, who had no knowledge
of what was then going on down the river. still, my relief, on the
heels of a failure, raised the usual cry, at the north, of
"repulse, failure, and bungling." there was no bungling on my part,
for i never worked harder or with more intensity of purpose in my
life; and general grant, long after, in his report of the
operations of the siege of vicksburg, gave us all full credit for
the skill of the movement, and described the almost impregnable
nature of the ground; and, although in all official reports i
assumed the whole responsibility, i have ever felt that had general
morgan promptly and skillfully sustained the lead of frank blair's
brigade on that day, we should have broken the rebel line, and
effected a lodgment on the hills behind vicksburg. general frank
blair was outspoken and indignant against generals morgan and de
courcey at the time, and always abused me for assuming the whole
blame. but, had we succeeded, we might have found ourselves in a
worse trap, when general pemberton was at full liberty to turn his
whole force against us. while i was engaged at chickasaw bayou,
admiral porter was equally busy in the yazoo river, threatening the
enemy's batteries at haines's and snyder's bluffs above. in a sharp
engagement he lost one of his best officers, in the person of
captain gwin, united states navy, who, though on board an ironclad,
insisted on keeping his post on deck, where he was struck in the
breast by a round shot, which carried away the muscle, and contused
the lung within, from which he died a few days after. we of the
army deplored his loss quite as much as his fellows of the navy,
for he had been intimately associated with us in our previous
operations on the tennessee river, at shiloh and above, and we had
come to regard him as one of us.
on the th of january, , our fleet of transports was
collected at milliken's bend, about ten miles above the mouth of
the yazoo, admiral porter remaining with his gunboats at the yazoo.
general john a. mcclernand was in chief command, general george w.
morgan commanded the first corps and i the second corps of the army
of the mississippi.
i had learned that a small steamboat, the blue wing, with a
mail, towing coal-barges and loaded with ammunition, had left
memphis for the yazoo, about the th of december, had been
captured by a rebel boat which had come out of the arkansas river,
and had been carried up that river to fort hind.
we had reports from this fort, usually called the "post of
arkansas," about forty miles above the mouth, that it was held by
about five thousand rebels, was an inclosed work, commanding the
passage of the river, but supposed to be easy of capture from the
rear. at that time i don't think general mcclernand had any
definite views or plays of action. if so, he did not impart them to
me. he spoke, in general terms of opening the navigation of the
mississippi, "cutting his way to the sea," etc., etc., but the
modus operandi was not so clear. knowing full well that we could
not carry on operations against vicksburg as long as the rebels
held the post of arkansas, whence to attack our boats coming and
going without convoy, i visited him on his boat, the tigress, took
with me a boy who had been on the blue wing, and had escaped, and
asked leave to go up the arkansas, to clear out the post. he made
various objections, but consented to go with me to see admiral
porter about it. we got up steam in the forest queen, during the
night of january th, stopped at the tigress, took general
mcclernand on board, and proceeded down the river by night to the
admiral's boat, the black hawk, lying in the mouth of the yazoo. it
must have been near midnight, and admiral porter was in deshabille.
we were seated in his cabin and i explained my views about arkansas
post, and asked his cooperation. he said that he was short of coal,
and could not use wood in his iron-clad boats. of these i asked for
two, to be commanded by captain shirk or phelps, or some officer of
my acquaintance. at that moment, poor gwin lay on his bed, in a
state-room close by, dying from the effect of the cannon shot
received at haines's bluff, as before described. porter's manner to
mcclernand was so curt that i invited him out into a forward-cabin
where he had his charts, and asked him what he meant by it. he said
that "he did not like him;" that in washington, before coming west,
he had been introduced to him by president lincoln, and he had
taken a strong prejudice against him. i begged him, for the sake of
harmony, to waive that, which he promised to do. returning to the
cabin, the conversation was resumed, and, on our offering to tow
his gunboats up the river to save coal, and on renewing the request
for shirk to command the detachment, porter said, "suppose i go
along myself?" i answered, if he would do so, it would insure the
success of the enterprise. at that time i supposed general
mcclernand would send me on this business, but he concluded to go
himself, and to take his whole force. orders were at once issued
for the troops not to disembark at milliken's bend, but to remain
as they were on board the transports. my two divisions were
commanded—the first, by brigadier-general frederick steele,
with three brigades, commanded by brigadier-generals f. p. blair,
c. e. hooey, and j. m. thayer; the second, by brigadier-general d.
stuart, with two brigades, commanded by colonels g. a. smith and t.
kilby smith.
the whole army, embarked on steamboats convoyed by the gunboats,
of which three were iron-clads, proceeded up the mississippi river
to the mouth of white river, which we reached january th. on the
next day we continued up white river to the "cut-off;" through this
to the arkansas, and up the arkansas to notrib's farm, just below
fort hindman. early the next morning we disembarked. stuart's
division, moving up the river along the bank, soon encountered a
force of the enemy intrenched behind a line of earthworks,
extending from the river across to the swamp. i took steele's
division, marching by the flank by a road through the swamp to the
firm ground behind, and was moving up to get to the rear of fort
hindman, when general mcclernand overtook me, with the report that
the rebels had abandoned their first position, and had fallen back
into the fort. by his orders, we counter-marched, recrossed the
swamp, and hurried forward to overtake stuart, marching for fort
hindman. the first line of the rebels was about four miles below
fort hindman, and the intervening space was densely, wooded and
obscure, with the exception of some old fields back of and close to
the fort. during the night, which was a bright moonlight one, we
reconnoitred close up, and found a large number of huts which had
been abandoned, and the whole rebel force had fallen back into and
about the fort. personally i crept up to a stump so close that i
could hear the enemy hard at work, pulling down houses, cutting
with axes, and building intrenchments. i could almost hear their
words, and i was thus listening when, about  a. m. the bugler in
the rebel camp sounded as pretty a reveille as i ever listened
to.
when daylight broke it revealed to us a new line of parapet
straight across the peninsula, connecting fort hindman, on the
arkansas river bank, with the impassable swamp about a mile to its
left or rear. this peninsula was divided into two nearly equal
parts by a road. my command had the ground to the right of the
road, and morgan's corps that to the left. mcclernand had his
quarters still on the tigress, back at notrib's farm, but moved
forward that morning (january th) to a place in the woods to our
rear, where he had a man up a tree, to observe and report the
movements.
there was a general understanding with admiral porter that he
was to attack the fort with his three ironclad gunboats directly by
its water-front, while we assaulted by land in the rear. about 
a.m. i got a message from general mcclernand, telling me where he
could be found, and asking me what we were waiting for. i answered
that we were then in close contact with the enemy, viz., about five
or six hundred yards off; that the next movement must be a direct
assault; that this should be simultaneous along the whole line; and
that i was waiting to hear from the gunboats; asking him to notify
admiral porter that we were all ready. in about half an hour i
heard the clear ring of the navy-guns; the fire gradually
increasing in rapidity and advancing toward the fort. i had
distributed our field-guns, and, when i judged the time had come, i
gave the orders to begin. the intervening ground between us and the
enemy was a dead level, with the exception of one or two small
gullies, and our men had no cover but the few standing trees and
some logs on the ground. the troops advanced well under a heavy
fire, once or twice falling to the ground for a sort of rest or
pause. every tree had its group of men, and behind each log was a
crowd of sharp-shooters, who kept up so hot a fire that the rebel
troops fired wild. the fire of the fort proper was kept busy by the
gunboats and morgan's corps, so that all my corps had to encounter
was the direct fire from the newly-built parapet across the
peninsula. this line had three sections of field-guns, that kept
things pretty lively, and several round-shot came so near me that i
realized that they were aimed at my staff; so i dismounted, and
made them scatter.
as the gunboats got closer up i saw their flags actually over
the parapet of fort hindman, and the rebel gunners scamper out of
the embrasures and run down into the ditch behind. about the same
time a man jumped up on the rebel parapet just where the road
entered, waving a large white flag, and numerous smaller white rags
appeared above the parapet along the whole line. i immediately
ordered, "cease firing!" and sent the same word down the line to
general steele, who had made similar progress on the right,
following the border of he swamp. i ordered my aide, colonel
dayton, to jump on his horse and ride straight up to the large
white flag, and when his horse was on the parapet i followed with
the rest of my staff. all firing had ceased, except an occasional
shot away to the right, and one of the captains (smith) of the
thirteenth regulars was wounded after the display of the white
flag. on entering the line, i saw that our muskets and guns had
done good execution; for there was a horse-battery, and every horse
lay dead in the traces. the fresh-made parapet had been knocked
down in many places, and dead men lay around very thick. i inquired
who commanded at that point, and a colonel garland stepped up and
said that he commanded that brigade. i ordered him to form his
brigade, stack arms, hang the belts on the muskets, and stand
waiting for orders. stuart's division had been halted outside the
parapet. i then sent major hammond down the rebel line to the
right, with orders to stop steele's division outside, and to have
the other rebel brigade stack its arms in like manner, and to await
further orders. i inquired of colonel garland who commanded in
chief, and he said that general churchill did, and that he was
inside the fort. i then rode into the fort, which was well built,
with good parapets, drawbridge, and ditch, and was an inclosed work
of four bastions. i found it full of soldiers and sailors, its
parapets toward the river well battered in, and porter's gunboats
in the river, close against the fort, with their bows on shore. i
soon found general churchill, in conversation with admiral porter
and general a. j. smith, and about this time my adjutant-general,
major j. h. hammond, came and reported that general deshler, who
commanded the rebel brigade facing and opposed to steele, had
refused to stack arms and surrender, on the ground that he had
received no orders from his commanding general; that nothing
separated this brigade from steele's men except the light parapet,
and that there might be trouble there at any moment. i advised
general churchill to send orders at once, because a single shot
might bring the whole of steele's division on deshler's brigade,
and i would not be responsible for the consequences; soon
afterward, we both concluded to go in person. general churchill had
the horses of himself and staff in the ditch; they were brought in,
and we rode together to where garland was standing, and churchill
spoke to him in an angry tone, "why did you display the white
flag!" garland replied, "i received orders to do so from one of
your staff." churchill denied giving such an order, and angry words
passed between them. i stopped them, saying that it made little
difference then, as they were in our power. we continued to ride
down the line to its extreme point, where we found deshler in
person, and his troops were still standing to the parapet with
their muskets in hand. steele'e men were on the outside. i asked
deshler: "what does this mean? you are a regular officer, and ought
to know better." he answered, snappishly, that "he had received no
orders to surrender;" when general churchill said: "you see, sir,
that we are in their power, and you may surrender." deshler turned
to his staff-officers and ordered them to repeat the command to
"stack arms," etc., to the colonels of his brigade. i was on my
horse, and he was on foot. wishing to soften the blow of defeat, i
spoke to him kindly, saying that i knew a family of deshlers in
columbus, ohio, and inquired if they were relations of his. he
disclaimed any relation with people living north of the ohio, in an
offensive tone, and i think i gave him a piece of my mind that he
did not relish. he was a west point graduate, small but very
handsome, and was afterward killed in battle. i never met him
again.
returning to the position where i had first entered the rebel
line, i received orders from general mcclernand, by one of his
staff, to leave general a. j. smith in charge of the fort and
prisoners, and with my troops to remain outside. the officer
explained that the general was then on the tigress, which had moved
up from below, to a point in the river just above the fort; and not
understanding his orders, i concluded to go and see him in person.
my troops were then in possession of two of the three brigades
which composed the army opposed to us; and my troops were also in
possession of all the ground of the peninsula outside the
"fort-proper" (hindman). i found general mcclernand on the tigress,
in high spirits. he said repeatedly: "glorious! glorious! my star
is ever in the ascendant!" he spoke complimentarily of the troops,
but was extremely jealous of the navy. he said: "i'll make a
splendid report;" "i had a man up a tree;" etc. i was very hungry
and tired, and fear i did not appreciate the honors in reserve for
us, and asked for something to eat and drink. he very kindly
ordered something to be brought, and explained to me that by his
"orders" he did not wish to interfere with the actual state of
facts; that general a. j. smith would occupy "fort hindman," which
his troops had first entered, and i could hold the lines outside,
and go on securing the prisoners and stores as i had begun. i
returned to the position of garland's brigade and gave the
necessary orders for marching all the prisoners, disarmed, to a
pocket formed by the river and two deep gullies just above the
fort, by which time it had become quite dark. after dark another
rebel regiment arrived from pine bluff, marched right in, and was
also made prisoners. there seemed to be a good deal of feeling
among the rebel officers against garland, who asked leave to stay
with me that night, to which i of course consented. just outside
the rebel parapet was a house which had been used for a hospital. i
had a room cleaned out, and occupied it that night. a
cavalry-soldier lent me his battered coffee-pot with some coffee
and scraps of hard bread out of his nose-bag; garland and i made
some coffee, ate our bread together, and talked politics by the
fire till quite late at night, when we lay down on straw that was
saturated with the blood of dead or wounded men. the next day the
prisoners were all collected on their boats, lists were made out,
and orders given for their transportation to st. louis, in charge
of my aide, major sanger. we then proceeded to dismantle and level
the forts, destroy or remove the stores, and we found in the
magazine the very ammunition which had been sent for us in the blue
wing, which was secured and afterward used in our twenty-pound
parrott guns.
on the th we reembarked; the whole expedition returned out of
the river by the direct route down the arkansas during a heavy
snow-storm, and rendezvoused in the mississippi, at napoleon, at
the mouth of the arkansas. here general mcclernand told me he had
received a letter from general grant at memphis, who disapproved of
our movement up the arkansas; but that communication was made
before he had learned of our complete success. when informed of
this, and of the promptness with which it had been executed, he
could not but approve. we were then ordered back to milliken's
bend, to await general grant's arrival in person. we reached
milliken's bend january st.
mcclernand's report of the capture of fort hindman almost
ignored the action of porter's fleet altogether. this was unfair,
for i know that the admiral led his fleet in person in the
river-attack, and that his guns silenced those of fort hindman, and
drove the gunners into the ditch.
the aggregate loss in my corps at arkansas post was five hundred
and nineteen, viz., four officers and seventy-five men killed,
thirty-four officers and four hundred and six men wounded. i never
knew the losses in the gunboat fleet, or in morgan's corps; but
they must have been less than in mine, which was more exposed. the
number of rebel dead must have been nearly one hundred and fifty;
of prisoners, by actual count, we secured four thousand seven
hundred and ninety-one, and sent them north to st. louis.
the campaign of , resulting, in the capture of vicksburg,
was so important, that its history has been well studied and well
described in all the books treating of the civil war, more
especially by dr. draper, in his "history of the civil war in
america," and in badeau's "military history of general grant." in
the latter it is more fully and accurately given than in any other,
and is well illustrated by maps and original documents. i now need
only attempt to further illustrate badeau's account by some
additional details. when our expedition came out of the arkansas
river, january, ,, and rendezvoused at the river-bank, in
front of the town of napoleon, arkansas, we were visited by general
grant in person, who had come down from memphis in a steamboat.
although at this time major-general j. a. mcclernand was in command
of the army of the mississippi, by virtue of a confidential order
of the war department, dated october , , which order bore the
indorsement of president lincoln, general grant still exercised a
command over him, by reason of his general command of the
department of the tennessee. by an order (no. ) of december ,
, from the war department, received at arkansas post, the
western armies had been grouped into five corps d'armee, viz.: the
thirteenth, major-general mcclernand; the fourteenth, major-general
george h. thomas, in middle tennessee; the fifteenth, major-general
w. t. sherman; the sixteenth, major-general hurlbut, then at or
near memphis; and the seventeenth, major-general mcpherson, also at
and back of memphis. general grant when at napoleon, on the th of
january, ordered mcclernand with his own and my corps to return to
vicksburg, to disembark on the west bank, and to resume work on a
canal across the peninsula, which had been begun by general thomas
williams the summer before, the object being to turn the
mississippi river at that point, or at least to make a passage for
our fleet of gunboats and transports across the peninsula, opposite
vicksburg. general grant then returned to memphis, ordered to lake
providence, about sixty miles above us, mcpherson's corps, the
seventeenth, and then came down again to give his personal
supervision to the whole movement.
the mississippi river was very high and rising, and we began
that system of canals on which we expended so much hard work
fruitlessly: first, the canal at young's plantation, opposite
vicksburg; second, that at lake providence; and third, at the yazoo
pass, leading into the head-waters of the yazoo river. early in
february the gunboats indianola and queen of the west ran the
batteries of vicksburg. the latter was afterward crippled in red
river, and was captured by the rebels; and the indianola was butted
and sunk about forty miles below vicksburg. we heard the booming of
the guns, but did not know of her loss till some days after. during
the months of january and february, we were digging the canal and
fighting off the water of the mississippi, which continued to rise
and threatened to drown us. we had no sure place of refuge except
the narrow levee, and such steamboats as remained abreast of our
camps. my two divisions furnished alternately a detail of five
hundred men a day, to work on the canal. so high was the water in
the beginning of march, that mcclernand's corps was moved to higher
ground, at milliken's bend, but i remained at young's plantation,
laid off a due proportion of the levee for each subdivision of my
command, and assigned other parts to such steamboats as lay at the
levee. my own headquarters were in mrs. grove's house, which had
the water all around it, and could only be reached by a plank-walk
from the levee, built on posts. general frederick steele commanded
the first division, and general d. smart the second; this latter
division had been reenforced by general hugh ewing's brigade, which
had arrived from west virginia.
at the time of its date i received the following note from
general grant:
milliken's bend, march , 
general sherman.
dear sir: i have just returned from a reconnoissance up steele's
bayou, with the admiral (porter), and five of his gunboats. with
some labor in cutting tree-tops out of the way, it will be
navigable for any class of steamers.
i want you to have your pioneer corps, or one regiment of good men
for such work, detailed, and at the landing as soon as
possible.
the party will want to take with them their rations, arms, and
sufficient camp and garrison equipage for a few days. i will have a
boat at any place you may designate, as early as the men can be
there. the eighth missouri (being many of them boatmen) would be
excellent men for this purpose.
as soon as you give directions for these men to be in readiness,
come up and see me, and i will explain fully. the tug that takes
this is instructed to wait for you. a full supply of axes will be
required.
very respectfully,
u. s. grant, major-general.
this letter was instantly ( a.m.) sent to colonel giles a.
smith, commanding the eighth missouri, with orders to prepare
immediately. he returned it at ., with an answer that the
regiment was all ready. i went up to milliken's bend in the tug,
and had a conference with the general, resulting in these
orders:
headquarters department of the tennessee before vicksburg, march
major-general w. t. sherman, commanding fifteenth army corps.
general: you will proceed as early as practicable up steele's
bayou, and through black bayou to deer creek, and thence with the
gunboats now there by any route they may take to get into the yazoo
river, for the purpose of determining the feasibility of getting an
army through that route to the east bank of that river, and at a
point from which they can act advantageously against
vicksburg.
make such details from your army corps as may be required to clear
out the channel of the various bayous through which transports
would have to ran, and to hold such points as in your judgment
should be occupied.
i place at your disposal to-day the steamers diligent and silver
wave, the only two suitable for the present navigation of this
route. others will be supplied you as fast as required, and they
can be got.
i have given directions (and you may repeat them) that the party
going on board the steamer diligent push on until they reach black
bayou, only stopping sufficiently long at any point before reaching
there to remove such obstructions as prevent their own progress.
captain kossak, of the engineers, will go with this party. the
other boat-load will commence their work in steele's bayou, and
make the navigation as free as possible all the way through.
there is but little work to be done in steele's bayou, except for
about five miles abort midway of the bayou. in this portion many
overhanging trees will have to be removed, and should be dragged
out of the channel.
very respectfully,
u. s. grant, major-general.
on returning to my camp at young's point, i started these two
boats up the yazoo and steele's bayou, with the eighth missouri and
some pioneers, with axes, saws, and all the tools necessary. i gave
orders for a part of stuart's division to proceed in the large
boats up the mississippi river to a point at gwin's plantation,
where a bend of steele's bayou neared the main river; and the next
day, with one or two stag-officers and orderlies, got a navy-tug,
and hurried up to overtake admiral porter. about sixty miles up
steele's bayou we came to the gunboat price, lieutenant woodworth,
united states navy; commanding, and then turned into black bayou, a
narrow, crooked channel, obstructed by overhanging oaks, and filled
with cypress and cotton-wood trees. the gunboats had forced their
way through, pushing aside trees a foot in diameter. in about four
miles we overtook the gunboat fleet just as it was emerging into
deer creek. along deer creek the alluvium was higher, and there was
a large cotton-plantation belonging to a mr. hill, who was absent,
and the negroes were in charge of the place. here i overtook
admiral porter, and accompanied him a couple of miles up deer
creek, which was much wider and more free of trees, with
plantations on both sides at intervals. admiral porter thought he
had passed the worst, and that he would be able to reach the
rolling fork and sunflower. he requested me to return and use all
possible means to clear out black bayou. i returned to hill's
plantation, which was soon reached by major coleman, with a part of
the eighth missouri; the bulk of the regiment and the pioneers had
been distributed along the bayous, and set to work under the
general supervision of captain kosaak. the diligent and silver wave
then returned to twin's plantation and brought up brigadier-general
giles a. smith, with the sixth missouri, and part of the one
hundred and sixteenth illinois. admiral porter was then working up
deer creek with his iron-clads, but he had left me a tug, which
enabled me to reconnoitre the country, which was all under water
except the narrow strip along deer creek. during the th i heard
the heavy navy-guns booming more frequently than seemed consistent
with mere guerrilla operations; and that night i got a message from
porter, written on tissue-paper, brought me through the swamp by a
negro, who had it concealed in a piece of tobacco.
the admiral stated that he had met a force of infantry and
artillery which gave him great trouble by killing the men who had
to expose themselves outside the iron armor to shove off the bows
of the boats, which had so little headway that they would not
steer. he begged me to come to his rescue as quickly as possible.
giles a. smith had only about eight hundred men with him, but i
ordered him to start up deer creek at once, crossing to the east
side by an old bridge at hill's plantation, which we had repaired
for the purpose; to work his way up to the gunboat, fleet, and to
report to the admiral that i would come, up with every man i could
raise as soon as possible. i was almost alone at hill's, but took a
canoe, paddled down black bayou to the gunboat price, and there,
luckily, found the silver wave with a load of men just arrived from
twin's plantation. taking some of the parties who were at work
along the bayou into an empty coal-barge, we tugged it up by a
navy-tug, followed by the silver wave, crashing through the trees,
carrying away pilot-house, smoke-stacks, and every thing
above-deck; but the captain (mcmillan, of pittsburg) was a brave
fellow, and realized the necessity. the night was absolutely black,
and we could only make two and a half of the four miles. we then
disembarked, and marched through the canebrake, carrying lighted
candles in our hands, till we got into the open cotton-fields at
hill's plantation, where we lay down for a few hours' rest. these
men were a part of giles a. smith's brigade, and part belonged to
the brigade of t. bilby smith, the senior officer present being
lieutenant-colonel rice, fifty-fourth ohio, an excellent young
officer. we had no horses.
on sunday morning, march st, as soon as daylight appeared, we
started, following the same route which giles a. smith had taken
the day before; the battalion of the thirteenth united states
regulars, major chase, in the lead. we could hear porter's guns,
and knew that moments were precious. being on foot myself, no man
could complain, and we generally went at the double-quick, with
occasional rests. the road lay along deer creek, passing several
plantations; and occasionally, at the bends, it crossed the swamp,
where the water came above my hips. the smaller drummer-boys had to
carry their drums on their heads, and most of the men slang their
cartridge-boxes around their necks. the soldiers generally were
glad to have their general and field officers afoot, but we gave
them a fair specimen of marching, accomplishing about twenty-one
miles by noon. of course, our speed was accelerated by the sounds
of the navy-guns, which became more and more distinct, though we
could see nothing. at a plantation near some indian mounds we met a
detachment of the eighth missouri, that had been up to the fleet,
and had been sent down as a picket to prevent any obstructions
below. this picket reported that admiral porter had found deer
creek badly obstructed, had turned back; that there was a rebel
force beyond the fleet, with some six-pounders, and nothing between
us and the fleet. so i sat down on the door-sill of a cabin to
rest, but had not been seated ten minutes when, in the wood just
ahead, not three hundred yards off, i heard quick and rapid firing
of musketry. jumping up, i ran up the road, and found
lieutenant-colonel rice, who said the head of his column had struck
a small force of rebels with a working gang of negroes, provided
with axes, who on the first fire had broken and run back into the
swamp. i ordered rice to deploy his brigade, his left on the road,
and extending as far into the swamp as the ground would permit, and
then to sweep forward until he uncovered the gunboats. the movement
was rapid and well executed, and we soon came to some large
cotton-fields and could see our gunboats in deer creek,
occasionally firing a heavy eight-inch gun across the cotton field
into the swamp behind. about that time major kirby, of the eighth
missouri, galloped down the road on a horse he had picked up the
night before, and met me. he explained the situation of affairs,
and offered me his horse. i got on bareback, and rode up the levee,
the sailors coming out of their iron-clads and cheering most
vociferously as i rode by, and as our men swept forward across the
cotton-field in full view. i soon found admiral porter, who was on
the deck of one of his iron-clads, with a shield made of the
section of a smoke-stack, and i doubt if he was ever more glad to
meet a friend than he was to see me. he explained that he had
almost reached the rolling fork, when the woods became full of
sharp-shooters, who, taking advantage of trees, stumps, and the
levee, would shoot down every man that poked his nose outside the
protection of their armor; so that he could not handle his clumsy
boats in the narrow channel. the rebels had evidently dispatched a
force from haines's bluff up the sunflower to the rolling fork, had
anticipated the movement of admiral porter's fleet, and had
completely obstructed the channel of the upper part of deer creek
by felling trees into it, so that further progress in that
direction was simply impossible. it also happened that, at the
instant of my arrival, a party of about four hundred rebels, armed
and supplied with axes, had passed around the fleet and had got
below it, intending in like manner to block up the channel by the
felling of trees, so as to cut off retreat. this was the force we
had struck so opportunely at the time before described. i inquired
of admiral porter what he proposed to do, and he said he wanted to
get out of that scrape as quickly as possible. he was actually
working back when i met him, and, as we then had a sufficient force
to cover his movement completely, he continued to back down deer
creek. he informed me at one time things looked so critical that he
had made up his mind to blow up the gunboats, and to escape with
his men through the swamp to the mississippi river. there being no
longer any sharp-shooters to bother the sailors, they made good
progress; still, it took three full days for the fleet to back out
of deer creek into black bayou, at hill's plantation, whence
admiral porter proceeded to his post at the month of the yazoo,
leaving captain owen in command of the fleet. i reported the facts
to general grant, who was sadly disappointed at the failure of the
fleet to get through to the yazoo above haines's bluff, and ordered
us all to resume our camps at young's point. we accordingly steamed
down, and regained our camps on the th. as this expedition up
deer creek was but one of many efforts to secure a footing from
which to operate against vicksburg, i add the report of
brigadier-general giles a. smith, who was the first to reach the
fleet:
march , 
captain l. m. dayton, assistant adjutant-general.
captain: i have the honor to report the movements of the first
brigade in the expedition up steele's bayou, black bayou, and deer
creek. the sixth missouri and one hundred and sixteenth illinois
regiments embarked at the month of muddy bayou on the evening of
thursday, the th of march, and proceeded up steele's bayou to the
month of black; thence up black bayou to hill's plantation, at its
junction with deer creek, where we arrived on friday at four
o'clock p.m., and joined the eighth missouri, lieutenant-colonel
coleman commanding, which had arrived at that point two days
before. general sherman had also established his headquarters
there, having preceded the eighth missouri in a tug, with no other
escort than two or three of his staff, reconnoitring all the
different bayous and branches, thereby greatly facilitating the
movements of the troops, but at the same time exposing himself
beyond precedent in a commanding general. at three o'clock of
saturday morning, the th instant, general sherman having received
a communication from admiral porter at the mouth of rolling fork,
asking for a speedy cooperation of the land forces with his fleet,
i was ordered by general sherman to be ready, with all the
available force at that point, to accompany him to his relief; but
before starting it was arranged that i should proceed with the
force at hand (eight hundred men), while he remained, again
entirely unprotected, to hurry up the troops expected to arrive
that night, consisting of the thirteenth infantry and one hundred
and thirteenth illinois volunteers, completing my brigade, and the
second brigade, colonel t. kilby smith commanding.
this, as the sequel showed; proved a very wise measure, and
resulted in the safety of the whole fleet. at daybreak we were in
motion, with a regular guide. we had proceeded but about six miles,
when we found the enemy had been very busy felling trees to
obstruct the creek.
all the negroes along the route had been notified to be ready at
night fall to continue the work. to prevent this as much as
possible, i ordered all able-bodied negroes to be taken along, and
warned some of the principal inhabitants that they would be held
responsible for any more obstructions being placed across the
creek. we reached the admiral about four o'clock p.m., with no
opposition save my advance-guard (company a, sixth missouri) being
fired into from the opposite side of the creek, killing one man,
and slightly wounding another; having no way of crossing, we had to
content ourselves with driving them beyond musket-range. proceeding
with as little loss of time as possible, i found the fleet
obstructed in front by fallen trees, in rear by a sunken
coal-barge, and surrounded, by a large force of rebels with an
abundant supply of artillery, but wisely keeping their main force
out of range of the admiral's guns. every tree and stump covered a
sharp-shooter, ready to pick off any luckless marine who showed his
head above-decks, and entirely preventing the working-parties from
removing obstructions.
in pursuance of orders from general sherman, i reported to admiral
porter for orders, who turned over to me all the land-forces in his
fleet (about one hundred and fifty men), together with two
howitzers, and i was instructed by him to retain a sufficient force
to clear out the sharp-shooters, and to distribute the remainder
along the creek for six or seven miles below, to prevent any more
obstructions being placed in it during the night. this was speedily
arranged, our skirmishers capturing three prisoners. immediate
steps were now taken to remove the coal-barge, which was
accomplished about daylight on sunday morning, when the fleet moved
back toward black bayou. by three o'clock p.m. we had only made
about six miles, owing to the large number of trees to be removed;
at this point, where our progress was very slow, we discovered a
long line of the enemy filing along the edge of the woods, and
taking position on the creek below us, and about one mile ahead of
our advance. shortly after, they opened fire on the gunboats from
batteries behind the cavalry and infantry. the boats not only
replied to the batteries, which they soon silenced, but poured a
destructive fire into their lines. heavy skirmishing was also heard
in our front, supposed to be by three companies from the sixth and
eighth missouri, whose position, taken the previous night to guard
the creek, was beyond the point reached by the enemy, and
consequently liable to be cut off or captured. captain owen, of the
louisville, the leading boat, made every effort to go through the
obstructions and aid in the rescuing of the men. i ordered major
kirby, with four companies of the sixth missouri, forward, with two
companies deployed. he soon met general sherman, with the
thirteenth infantry and one hundred and thirteenth illinois,
driving the enemy before them, and opening communication along the
creek with the gunboats. instead of our three companies referred to
as engaging the enemy, general sherman had arrived at a very
opportune moment with the two regiments mentioned above, and the
second brigade. the enemy, not expecting an attack from that
quarter, after some hot skirmishing, retreated. general sherman
immediately ordered the thirteenth infantry and one hundred and
thirteenth illinois to pursue; but, after following their trace for
about two miles, they were recalled.
we continued our march for about two miles, when we bivouacked for
the night. early on monday morning (march d) we continued our
march, but owing to the slow progress of the gunboats did not reach
hill's plantation until tuesday, the d instant, where we remained
until the th; we then reembarked, and arrived at young's point on
friday, the th instant.
below you will find a list of casualties. very respectfully,
giles a. smith, colonel eighth missouri, commanding first
brigade.
p. s.-i forgot to state above that the thirteenth infantry and one
hundred and thirteenth illinois being under the immediate command
of general sherman, he can mention them as their conduct
deserves.
on the d of april, a division of troops, commanded by
brigadier-general j. m. tuttle, was assigned to my corps, and was
designated the third division; and, on the th of april,
brigadier-general d. stuart was relieved from the command of the
second division, to which major-general frank p. blair was
appointed by an order from general grant's headquarters. stuart had
been with me from the time we were at benton barracks, in command
of the fifty-fifth illinois, then of a brigade, and finally of a
division; but he had failed in seeking a confirmation by the senate
to his nomination as brigadier-general, by reason of some old
affair at chicago, and, having resigned his commission as colonel,
he was out of service. i esteemed him very highly, and was actually
mortified that the service should thus be deprived of so excellent
and gallant an officer. he afterward settled in new orleans as a
lawyer, and died about  or .
on the th of april, my command, the fifteenth corps, was
composed of three divisions:
the first division, commanded by major-general fred steele; and his
three brigades by colonel manter, colonel charles r. wood, and
brigadier-general john m. thayer.
the second division, commanded by major-general frank p. blair; and
his three brigades by colonel giles a. smith, colonel thomas gilby
smith, and brigadier-general hugh ewing.
the third division, commanded by brigadier-general j. m. tuttle;
and his three brigades by brigadier-general r. p. buckland, colonel
j. a. mower, and brigadier-general john e. smith.
my own staff then embraced: dayton, mccoy, and hill, aides; j. h.
hammond, assistant adjutant-general; sanger, inspector-general;
mcfeeley, commissary; j. condit smith, quartermaster; charles
mcmillan, medical director; ezra taylor, chief of artillery; jno.
c. neely, ordnance-officer; jenney and pitzman,
engineers.
by this time it had become thoroughly demonstrated that we could
not divert the main river mississippi, or get practicable access to
the east bank of the yazoo, in the rear of vicksburg, by any of the
passes; and we were all in the habit of discussing the various
chances of the future. general grant's headquarters were at
milliken's bend, in tents, and his army was strung along the river
all the way from young's point up to lake providence, at least
sixty miles. i had always contended that the best way to take
vicksburg was to resume the movement which had been so well begun
the previous november, viz., for the main army to march by land
down the country inland of the mississippi river; while the
gunboat-fleet and a minor land-force should threaten vicksburg on
its river-front.
i reasoned that, with the large force then subject to general
grant's orders-viz., four army corps—he could easily resume
the movement from memphis, by way of oxford and grenada, to
jackson, mississippi, or down the ridge between the yazoo and big
black; but general grant would not, for reasons other than
military, take any course which looked like, a step backward; and
he himself concluded on the river movement below vicksburg, so as
to appear like connecting with general banks, who at the same time
was besieging port hudson from the direction of new orleans.
preliminary orders had already been given, looking to the
digging of a canal, to connect the river at duckport with willow
bayou, back of milliken's bend, so as to form a channel for the
conveyance of supplies, by way of richmond, to new carthage; and
several steam dredge-boats had come from the upper rivers to assist
in the work. one day early in april, i was up at general grant's
headquarters, and we talked over all these things with absolute
freedom. charles a. dana, assistant secretary of war, was there,
and wilson, rawlins, frank blair, mcpherson, etc. we all knew, what
was notorious, that general mcclernand was still intriguing against
general grant, in hopes to regain the command of the whole
expedition, and that others were raising a clamor against general
grant in the news papers at the north. even mr. lincoln and general
halleck seemed to be shaken; but at no instant of time did we (his
personal friends) slacken in our loyalty to him. one night, after
such a discussion, and believing that general mcclernand had no
real plan of action shaped in his mind, i wrote my letter of april
, , to colonel rawlins, which letter is embraced in full at
page  of badeau's book, and which i now reproduce here:
camp near vicksburg, april ,.
colonel j. a. rawlins, assistant adjutant-general to general
sir: i would most respectfully suggest (for reasons which i will
not name) that general grant call on his corps commanders for their
opinions, concise and positive, on the best general plan of a
campaign. unless this be done, there are men who will, in any
result falling below the popular standard, claim that their advice
was unheeded, and that fatal consequence resulted therefrom. my own
opinions are:
first. that the army of the tennessee is now far in advance of the
other grand armies of the united states.
second. that a corps from missouri should forthwith be moved from
st. louis to the vicinity of little rock, arkansas; supplies
collected there while the river is full, and land communication
with memphis opened via des arc on the white, and madison on the
st. francis river.
third. that as much of the yazoo pass, coldwater, and tallahatchie
rivers, as can be gained and fortified, be held, and the main army
be transported thither by land and water; that the road back to
memphis be secured and reopened, and, as soon as the waters
subside, grenada be attacked, and the swamp-road across to helena
be patrolled by cavalry.
fourth. that the line of the yalabusha be the base from which to
operate against the points where the mississippi central crosses
big black, above canton; and, lastly, where the vicksburg &
jackson railroad crosses the same river (big black). the capture of
vicksburg would result.
fifth. that a minor force be left in this vicinity, not to exceed
ten thousand men, with only enough steamboats to float and
transport them to any desired point; this force to be held always
near enough to act with the gunboats when the main army is known to
be near vicksburg—haines's bluff or yazoo city.
sixth. i do doubt the capacity of willow bayou (which i estimate to
be fifty miles long and very tortuous) as a military channel, to
supply an army large enough to operate against jackson,
mississippi, or the black river bridge; and such a channel will be
very vulnerable to a force coming from the west, which we must
expect. yet this canal will be most useful as the way to convey
coals and supplies to a fleet that should navigate the lower reach
of the mississippi between vicksburg and the red river.
seventh. the chief reason for operating solely by water was the
season of the year and high water in the tallahatchie and yalabusha
rivers. the spring is now here, and soon these streams will be no
serious obstacle, save in the ambuscades of the forest, and
whatever works the enemy may have erected at or near grenada. north
mississippi is too valuable for us to allow the enemy to hold it
and make crops this year.
i make these suggestions, with the request that general grant will
read them and give them, as i know he will, a share of his
thoughts. i would prefer that he should not answer this letter, but
merely give it as much or as little weight as it deserves. whatever
plan of action he may adopt will receive from me the same zealous
cooperation and energetic support as though conceived by myself. i
do not believe general banks will make any serious attack on port
hudson this spring. i am, etc.,
w. t. sherman, major-general.
this is the letter which some critics have styled a "protest."
we never had a council of war at any time during the vicksburg
campaign. we often met casually, regardless of rank or power, and
talked and gossiped of things in general, as officers do and
should. but my letter speaks for itself—it shows my opinions
clearly at that stage of the game, and was meant partially to
induce general grant to call on general mcclernand for a similar
expression of opinion, but, so far as i know, he did not. he went
on quietly to work out his own designs; and he has told me, since
the war, that had we possessed in december, , the experience of
marching and maintaining armies without a regular base, which we
afterward acquired, he would have gone on from oxford as first
contemplated, and would not have turned back because of the
destruction of his depot at holly springs by van dorn. the distance
from oxford to the rear of vicksburg is little greater than by the
circuitous route we afterward followed, from bruinsburg to jackson
and vicksburg, during which we had neither depot nor train of
supplies. i have never criticised general grant's strategy on this
or any other occasion, but i thought then that he had lost an
opportunity, which cost him and us six months' extra-hard work, for
we might have captured vicksburg from the direction of oxford in
january, quite as easily as was afterward done in july, .
general grant's orders for the general movement past vicksburg,
by richmond and carthage, were dated april , . mcclernand was
to lead off with his corps, mcpherson next, and my corps (the
fifteenth) to bring up the rear. preliminary thereto, on the night
of april th, seven iron-clads led by admiral porter in person, in
the benton, with three transports, and ten barges in tow, ran the
vicksburg batteries by night. anticipating a scene, i had four
yawl-boats hauled across the swamp, to the reach of the river below
vicksburg, and manned them with soldiers, ready to pick up any of
the disabled wrecks as they floated by. i was out in the stream
when the fleet passed vicksburg, and the scene was truly sublime.
as soon as the rebel gunners detected the benton, which was in the
lead, they opened on her, and on the others in succession, with
shot and shell; houses on the vicksburg side and on the opposite
shore were set on fire, which lighted up the whole river; and the
roar of cannon, the bursting of shells, and finally the burning of
the henry clay, drifting with the current, made up a picture of the
terrible not often seen. each gunboat returned the fire as she
passed the town, while the transports hugged the opposite shore.
when the benton had got abreast of us, i pulled off to her,
boarded, had a few words with admiral porter, and as she was
drifting rapidly toward the lower batteries at warrenton, i left,
and pulled back toward the shore, meeting the gunboat tuscumbia
towing the transport forest queen into the bank out of the range of
fire. the forest queen, captain conway, had been my flag-boat up
the arkansas, and for some time after, and i was very friendly with
her officers. this was the only transport whose captain would not
receive volunteers as a crew, but her own officers and crew stuck
to their boat, and carried her safely below the vicksburg
batteries, and afterward rendered splendid service in ferrying
troops across the river at grand gulf and bruinsburg. in passing
vicksburg, she was damaged in the hull and had a steam-pipe cut
away, but this was soon repaired. the henry clay was set on fire by
bursting shells, and burned up; one of my yawls picked up her pilot
floating on a piece of wreck, and the bulk of her crew escaped in
their own yawl-boat to the shore above. the silver wave, captain
mcmillan, the same that was with us up steele's bayou, passed
safely, and she also rendered good service afterward.
subsequently, on the night of april th, six other transports
with numerous barges loaded with hay, corn, freight, and
provisions, were drifted past vicksburg; of these the tigress was
hit, and sunk just as she reached the river-bank below, on our
side: i was there with my yawls, and saw colonel lagow, of general
grant's staff, who had passed the batteries in the tigress, and i
think he was satisfied never to attempt such a thing again. thus
general grant's army had below vicksburg an abundance of stores,
and boats with which to cross the river. the road by which the
troops marched was very bad, and it was not until the st of may
that it was clear for my corps. while waiting my turn to march, i
received a letter from general grant, written at carthage, saying
that he proposed to cross over and attack grand gulf, about the end
of april, and he thought i could put in my time usefully by making
a "feint" on haines's bluff, but he did not like to order me to do
it, because it might be reported at the north that i had again been
"repulsed, etc." thus we had to fight a senseless clamor at the
north, as well as a determined foe and the obstacles of nature. of
course, i answered him that i would make the "feint," regardless of
public clamor at a distance, and i did make it most effectually;
using all the old boats i could get about milliken's bend and the
mouth of the yazoo, but taking only ten small regiments, selected
out of blair's division, to make a show of force. we afterward
learned that general pemberton in vicksburg had previously
dispatched a large force to the assistance of general bowers, at
grand gulf and port gibson, which force had proceeded as far as
hankinson's ferry, when he discovered our ostentatious movement up
the yazoo, recalled his men, and sent them up to haines's bluff to
meet us. this detachment of rebel troops must have marched nearly
sixty miles without rest, for afterward, on reaching vicksburg, i
heard that the men were perfectly exhausted, and lay along the road
in groups, completely fagged out. this diversion, made with so much
pomp and display, therefore completely fulfilled its purpose, by
leaving general grant to contend with a minor force, on landing at
bruinsburg, and afterward at port gibson and grand gulf.
in may the waters of the mississippi had so far subsided that
all our canals were useless, and the roads had become practicable.
after mcpherson's corps had passed richmond, i took up the route of
march, with steele's and tuttle's divisions. blair's division
remained at milliken's bend to protect our depots there, till
relieved by troops from memphis, and then he was ordered to follow
us. our route lay by richmond and roundabout bayou; then, following
bayou vidal we struck the mississippi at perkins's plantation.
thence the route followed lake st. joseph to a plantation called
hard times, about five miles above grand gulf. the road was more or
less occupied by wagons and detachments belonging to mcpherson's
corps; still we marched rapidly and reached hard times on the th
of may. along the bayou or lake st. joseph were many very fine
cotton plantations, and i recall that of a mr. bowie,
brother-in-law of the hon. reverdy johnson, of baltimore. the house
was very handsome, with a fine, extensive grass-plot in front. we
entered the yard, and, leaving our horses with the headquarters
escort, walked to the house. on the front-porch i found a
magnificent grand-piano, with several satin-covered arm-chairs, in
one of which sat a union soldier (one of mcpherson's men), with his
feet on the keys of the piano, and his musket and knapsack lying on
the porch. i asked him what he was doing there, and he answered
that he was "taking a rest;" this was manifest and i started him in
a hurry, to overtake his command. the house was tenantless, and had
been completely ransacked; articles of dress and books were strewed
about, and a handsome boudoir with mirror front had been cast down,
striking a french bedstead, shivering the glass. the library was
extensive, with a fine collection of books; and hanging on the wall
were two full-length portraits of reverdy johnson and his wife, one
of the most beautiful ladies of our country, with whom i had been
acquainted in washington at the time of general taylor's
administration. behind the mansion was the usual double row of
cabins called the "quarters." there i found an old negro (a family
servant) with several women, whom i sent to the house to put things
in order; telling the old man that other troops would follow, and
he must stand on the porch to tell any officers who came along that
the property belonged to mr. bowie, who was the brother-in-law of
our friend mr. reverdy johnson, of baltimore, asking them to see
that no further harm was done. soon after we left the house i saw
some negroes carrying away furniture which manifestly belonged to
the house, and compelled them to carry it back; and after reaching
camp that night, at hard times, i sent a wagon back to bowie's
plantation, to bring up to dr. hollingsworth's house the two
portraits for safe keeping; but before the wagon had reached
bowie's the house was burned, whether by some of our men or by
negroes i have never learned.
at the river there was a good deal of scrambling to get across,
because the means of ferriage were inadequate; but by the aid of
the forest queen and several gunboats i got my command across
during the th of may, and marched out to hankiuson's ferry
(eighteen miles), relieving general crocker's division of
mcpherson's corps. mcclernand's corps and mcpherson's were still
ahead, and had fought the battle of port gibson, on the th. i
overtook general grant in person at auburn, and he accompanied my
corps all the way into jackson, which we reached may th.
mcclernand's corps had been left in observation toward edwards's
ferry. mcpherson had fought at raymond, and taken the left-hand
road toward jackson, via clinton, while my troops were ordered by
general grant in person to take the right-hand road leading through
mississippi springs. we reached jackson at the same time; mcpherson
fighting on the clinton road, and my troops fighting just outside
the town, on the raymond road, where we captured three entire
field-batteries, and about two hundred prisoners of war. the
rebels, under general joe johnston, had retreated through the town
northward on the canton road. generals grant, mcpherson, and i, met
in the large hotel facing the state-house, where the former
explained to us that he had intercepted dispatches from pemberton
to johnston, which made it important for us to work smart to
prevent a junction of their respective forces. mcpherson was
ordered to march back early the next day on the clinton road to
make junction with mcclernand, and i was ordered to remain one day
to break up railroads, to destroy the arsenal, a foundery, the
cotton-factory of the messrs. green, etc., etc., and then to follow
mcpherson.
mcpherson left jackson early on the th, and general grant
during the same day. i kept my troops busy in tearing up
railroad-tracks, etc., but early on the morning of the th
received notice from general grant that a battle was imminent near
edwards's depot; that he wanted me to dispatch one of my divisions
immediately, and to follow with the other as soon as i had
completed the work of destruction. steele's division started
immediately, and later in the day i followed with the other
division (tuttle's). just as i was leaving jackson, a very fat man
came to see me, to inquire if his hotel, a large, frame building
near the depot, were doomed to be burned. i told him we had no
intention to burn it, or any other house, except the machine-shops,
and such buildings as could easily be converted to hostile uses. he
professed to be a law-abiding union man, and i remember to have
said that this fact was manifest from the sign of his hotel, which
was the "confederate hotel;" the sign "united states" being faintly
painted out, and "confederate" painted over it! i remembered that
hotel, as it was the supper-station for the new orleans trains when
i used to travel the road before the war. i had not the least
purpose, however, of burning it, but, just as we were leaving the
town, it burst out in flames and was burned to the ground. i never
found out exactly who set it on fire, but was told that in one of
our batteries were some officers and men who had been made
prisoners at shiloh, with prentiss's division, and had been carried
past jackson in a railroad-train; they had been permitted by the
guard to go to this very hotel for supper, and had nothing to pay
but greenbacks, which were refused, with insult, by this same
law-abiding landlord. these men, it was said, had quietly and
stealthily applied the fire underneath the hotel just as we were
leaving the town.
about dark we met general grant's staff-officer near bolton
station, who turned us to the right, with orders to push on to
vicksburg by what was known as the upper jackson road, which
crossed the big black at bridgeport. during that day (may th) the
battle of champion hills had been fought and won by mcclernand's
and mcpherson's corps, aided by one division of mine (blairs),
under the immediate command of general grant; and mcpherson was
then following the mass of pemberton's army, disordered and
retreating toward vicksburg by the edwards's ferry road. general
blair's division had come up from the rear, was temporarily
attached to mcclernand's corps, taking part with it in the battle
of champion hills, but on the th it was ordered by general grant
across to bridgeport, to join me there.
just beyond bolton there was a small hewn-log house, standing
back in a yard, in which was a well; at this some of our soldiers
were drawing water. i rode in to get a drink, and, seeing a book on
the ground, asked some soldier to hand it to me. it was a volume of
the constitution of the united states, and on the title-page was
written the name of jefferson davis. on inquiry of a negro, i
learned that the place belonged to the then president of the
southern confederation. his brother joe davis's plantation was not
far off; one of my staff-officers went there, with a few soldiers,
and took a pair of carriage-horses, without my knowledge at the
time. he found joe davis at home, an old man, attended by a young
and affectionate niece; but they were overwhelmed with grief to see
their country overran and swarming with federal troops.
we pushed on, and reached the big black early, blair's troops
having preceded us by an hour or so. i found general blair in
person, and he reported that there was no bridge across the big
black; that it was swimming-deep; and that there was a rebel force
on the opposite side, intrenched. he had ordered a detachment of
the thirteenth united states regulars, under captain charles ewing,
to strip some artillery-horses, mount the men, and swim the river
above the ferry, to attack and drive away the party on the opposite
bank. i did not approve of this risky attempt, but crept down close
to the brink of the river bank, behind a corn-crib belonging to a
plantation house near by, and saw the parapet on the opposite bank.
ordering a section of guns to be brought forward by hand behind
this corn-crib, a few well-directed shells brought out of their
holes the little party that was covering the crossing, viz., a
lieutenant and ten men, who came down to the river-bank and
surrendered. blair's pontoon-train was brought up, consisting of
india-rubber boats, one of which was inflated, used as a boat, and
brought over the prisoners. a pontoon-bridge was at once begun,
finished by night, and the troops began the passage. after dark,
the whole scene was lit up with fires of pitch-pine. general grant
joined me there, and we sat on a log, looking at the passage of the
troops by the light of those fires; the bridge swayed to and fro
under the passing feet, and made a fine war-picture. at daybreak we
moved on, ascending the ridge, and by  a.m. the head of my
column, long drawn out, reached the benton road, and gave us
command of the peninsula between the yazoo and big black. i
dispatched colonel swan, of the fourth iowa cavalry, to haines's
bluff, to capture that battery from the rear, and he afterward
reported that he found it abandoned, its garrison having hastily
retreated into vicksburg, leaving their guns partially disabled, a
magazine full of ammunition, and a hospital full of wounded and
sick men. colonel swan saw one of our gunboats lying about two
miles below in the yazoo, to which he signaled. she steamed up, and
to its commander the cavalry turned over the battery at haines's
bluff, and rejoined me in front of vicksburg. allowing a couple of
hours for rest and to close up the column, i resumed the march
straight on vicksburg. about two miles before reaching the forts,
the road forked; the left was the main jackson road, and the right
was the "graveyard" road, which entered vicksburg near a large
cemetery. general grant in person directed me to take the
right-hand road, but, as mcpherson had not yet got up from the
direction of the railroad-bridge at big black, i sent the eighth
missouri on the main jackson road, to push the rebel skirmishers
into town, and to remain until relieved by mcpherson's advance,
which happened late that evening, may th. the battalion of the
thirteenth united states regulars, commanded by captain washington,
was at the head of the column on the right-hand road, and pushed
the rebels close behind their parapets; one of my staff, captain
pitzman, receiving a dangerous wound in the hip, which apparently
disabled him for life. by night blair's whole division had closed
up against the defenses of vicksburg, which were found to be strong
and well manned; and, on general steele's head of column arriving,
i turned it still more to the right, with orders to work its way
down the bluff, so as to make connection with our fleet in the
mississippi river. there was a good deal of desultory fighting that
evening, and a man was killed by the aide of general grant and
myself, as we sat by the road-side looking at steele's division
passing to the right. general steele's men reached the road which
led from vicksburg up to haines's bluff, which road lay at the foot
of the hills, and intercepted some prisoners and wagons which were
coming down from haines's bluff.
all that night mcpherson's troops were arriving by the main
jackson road, and mcclernand'a by another near the railroad,
deploying forward as fast as they struck the rebel works. my corps
(the fifteenth) had the right of the line of investment;
mcpherson's (the seventeenth) the centre; and mcclernand's (the
thirteenth) the left, reaching from the river above to the railroad
below. our lines connected, and invested about three-quarters of
the land-front of the fortifications of vicksburg. on the
supposition that the garrison of vicksburg was demoralized by the
defeats at champion hills and at the railroad crossing of the big
black, general grant ordered an assault at our respective fronts on
the th. my troops reached the top of the parapet, but could not
cross over. the rebel parapets were strongly manned, and the enemy
fought hard and well. my loss was pretty heavy, falling chiefly on
the thirteenth regulars, whose commanding officer, captain
washington, was killed, and several other regiments were pretty
badly cut up. we, however, held the ground up to the ditch till
night, and then drew back only a short distance, and began to
counter-trench. on the graveyard road, our parapet was within less
than fifty yards of the rebel ditch.
on the th of may, general grant called the three corps
commanders together, viz., mcclernand, mcpherson, and sherman. we
compared notes, and agreed that the assault of the day before had
failed, by reason of the natural strength of the position, and
because we were forced by the nature of the ground to limit our
attacks to the strongest parts of the enemy's line, viz., where the
three principal roads entered the city.
it was not a council of war, but a mere consultation, resulting
in orders from general grant for us to make all possible
preparations for a renewed assault on the d, simultaneously, at
 a.m. i reconnoitred my front thoroughly in person, from right to
left, and concluded to make my real attack at the right flank of
the bastion, where the graveyard road entered the enemy's
intrenchments, and at another point in the curtain about a hundred
yards to its right (our left); also to make a strong demonstration
by steele's division, about a mile to our right, toward the river.
all our field batteries were put in position, and were covered by
good epaulements; the troops were brought forward, in easy support,
concealed by the shape of the ground; and to the minute, viz., 
a.m. of may d, the troops sprang to the assault. a small party,
that might be called a forlorn hope, provided with plank to cross
the ditch, advanced at a run, up to the very ditch; the lines of
infantry sprang from cover, and advanced rapidly in line of battle.
i took a position within two hundred yards of the rebel parapet, on
the off slope of a spur of ground, where by advancing two or three
steps i could see every thing. the rebel line, concealed by the
parapet, showed no sign of unusual activity, but as our troops came
in fair view, the enemy rose behind their parapet and poured a
furious fire upon our lines; and, for about two hours, we had a
severe and bloody battle, but at every point we were repulsed. in
the very midst of this, when shell and shot fell furious and fast,
occurred that little episode which has been celebrated in song and
story, of the boy orion p. howe, badly wounded, bearing me a
message for cartridges, calibre , described in my letter to the
hon. e. m. stanton, secretary of war. this boy was afterward
appointed a cadet to the united states naval academy, at annapolis,
but he could not graduate, and i do not now know what has become of
him.
after our men had been fairly beaten back from off the parapet,
and had got cover behind the spurs of ground close up to the rebel
works, general grant came to where i was, on foot, having left his
horse some distance to the rear. i pointed out to him the rebel
works, admitted that my assault had failed, and he said the result
with mcpherson and mcclernand was about the same. while he was with
me, an orderly or staff-officer came and handed him a piece of
paper, which he read and handed to me. i think the writing was in
pencil, on a loose piece of paper, and was in general mcclernand's
handwriting, to the effect that "his troops had captured the rebel
parapet in his front," that, "the flag of the union waved over the
stronghold of vicksburg," and asking him (general grant) to give
renewed orders to mcpherson and sherman to press their attacks on
their respective fronts, lest the enemy should concentrate on him
(mcclernand). general grant said, "i don't believe a word of it;"
but i reasoned with him, that this note was official, and must be
credited, and i offered to renew the assault at once with new
troops. he said he would instantly ride down the line to
mcclernand's front, and if i did not receive orders to the
contrary, by  o'clock p.m., i might try it again. mower's fresh
brigade was brought up under cover, and some changes were made in
giles smith's brigade; and, punctually at  p.m., hearing heavy
firing down along the line to my left, i ordered the second
assault. it was a repetition of the first, equally unsuccessful and
bloody. it also transpired that the same thing had occurred with
general mcpherson, who lost in this second assault some most
valuable officers and men, without adequate result; and that
general mcclernand, instead of having taken any single point of the
rebel main parapet, had only taken one or two small outlying
lunettes open to the rear, where his men were at the mercy of the
rebels behind their main parapet, and most of them were actually
thus captured. this affair caused great feeling with us, and severe
criticisms on general mcclernand, which led finally to his removal
from the command of the thirteenth corps, to which general ord
succeeded. the immediate cause, however, of general mcclernand's
removal was the publication of a sort of congratulatory order
addressed to his troops, first published in st. louis, in which he
claimed that he had actually succeeded in making a lodgment in
vicksburg, but had lost it, owing to the fact that mcpherson and
sherman did not fulfill their parts of the general plan of attack.
this was simply untrue. the two several assaults made may d, on
the lines of vicksburg, had failed, by reason of the great strength
of the position and the determined fighting of its garrison. i have
since seen the position at sevastopol, and without hesitation i
declare that at vicksburg to have been the more difficult of the
two.
thereafter our proceedings were all in the nature of a siege.
general grant drew more troops from memphis, to prolong our general
line to the left, so as completely to invest the place on its
land-side, while the navy held the river both above and below.
general mower's brigade of tuttle's division was also sent across
the river to the peninsula, so that by may st vicksburg was
completely beleaguered. good roads were constructed from our camps
to the several landing-places on the yazoo river, to which points
our boats brought us ample supplies; so that we were in a splendid
condition for a siege, while our enemy was shut up in a close fort,
with a large civil population of men, women, and children to feed,
in addition to his combatant force. if we could prevent sallies, or
relief from the outside, the fate of the garrison of vicksburg was
merely a question of time.
i had my headquarters camp close up to the works, near the
centre of my corps, and general grant had his bivouac behind a
ravine to my rear. we estimated pemberton's whole force in
vicksburg at thirty thousand men, and it was well known that the
rebel general joseph e. johnston was engaged in collecting another
strong force near the big black, with the intention to attack our
rear, and thus to afford pemberton an opportunity to escape with
his men. even then the ability of general johnston was recognized,
and general grant told me that he was about the only general on
that side whom he feared. each corps kept strong pickets well to
the rear; but, as the rumors of johnston's accumulating force
reached us, general grant concluded to take stronger measures. he
had received from the north general j. g. parker's corps (ninth),
which had been posted at haines's bluff; then, detailing one
division from each of the three corps d'armee investing vicksburg,
he ordered me to go out, take a general command of all, and to
counteract any movement on the part of general johnston to relieve
vicksburg. i reconnoitred the whole country, from haines's bluff to
the railroad bridge, and posted the troops thus:
parke's two divisions from haines's bluff out to the benton or
ridge road; tuttle's division, of my corps, joining on and
extending to a plantation called young's, overlooking bear creek
valley, which empties into the big black above messinger's ferry;
then mcarthurs division, of mcpherson's corps, took up the line,
and reached to osterhaus's division of mcclernand's corps, which
held a strong fortified position at the railroad-crossing of the
big black river. i was of opinion that, if johnston should cross
the big black, he could by the favorable nature of the country be
held in check till a concentration could be effected by us at the
point threatened. from the best information we could gather,
general johnston had about thirty or forty thousand men. i took
post near a plantation of one trible, near markham's, and
frequently reconnoitred the whole line, and could see the enemy
engaged in like manner, on the east aide of big black; but he never
attempted actually to cross over, except with some cavalry, just
above bear creek, which was easily driven back. i was there from
june th to the th of july. in a small log-house near markham's
was the family of mr. klein, whose wife was the daughter of mrs.
day, of new orleans, who in turn was the sister of judge t. w.
bartley, my brother-in-law. i used frequently to drop in and take a
meal with them, and mrs. klein was generally known as the general's
cousin, which doubtless saved her and her family from molestation,
too common on the part of our men.
one day, as i was riding the line near a farm known as parson
fog's, i heard that the family of a mr. wilkinson, of new orleans,
was "refugeeing" at a house near by. i rode up, inquired, and found
two young girls of that name, who said they were the children of
general wilkinson, of louisiana, and that their brother had been at
the military school at alexandria. inquiring for their mother, i
was told she was spending the day at parson fox's. as this house
was on my route, i rode there, went through a large gate into the
yard, followed by my staff and escort, and found quite a number of
ladies sitting on the porch. i rode up and inquired if that were
parson fox's. the parson, a fine-looking, venerable old man, rose,
and said that he was parson fox. i then inquired for mrs.
wilkinson, when an elderly lady answered that she was the person. i
asked her if she were from plaquemine parish, louisiana, and she
said she was. i then inquired if she had a son who had been a cadet
at alexandria when general sherman was superintendent, and she
answered yes. i then announced myself, inquired after the boy, and
she said he was inside of vicksburg, an artillery lieutenant. i
then asked about her husband, whom i had known, when she burst into
tears, and cried out in agony, "you killed him at bull run, where
he was fighting for his country!" i disclaimed killing anybody at
bull run; but all the women present (nearly a dozen) burst into
loud lamentations, which made it most uncomfortable for me, and i
rode away. on the d of july, as i sat at my bivouac by the
road-side near trible's, i saw a poor, miserable horse, carrying a
lady, and led by a little negro boy, coming across a cotton-field
toward me; as they approached i recognized poor mrs. wilkinson, and
helped her to dismount. i inquired what had brought her to me in
that style, and she answered that she knew vicksburg, was going to
surrender, and she wanted to go right away to see her boy. i had a
telegraph-wire to general grant's headquarters, and had heard that
there were symptoms of surrender, but as yet nothing definite. i
tried to console and dissuade her, but she was resolved, and i
could not help giving her a letter to general grant, explaining to
him who she was, and asking him to give her the earliest
opportunity to see her son. the distance was fully twenty miles,
but off she started, and i afterward learned that my letter had
enabled her to see her son, who had escaped unharmed. later in the
day i got by telegraph general grant's notice of the negotiations
for surrender; and, by his directions, gave general orders to my
troops to be ready at a moment's notice to cross the big black, and
go for joe johnston.
the next day (july , ) vicksburg surrendered, and orders
were given for at once attacking general johnston. the thirteenth
corps (general ord) was ordered to march rapidly, and cross the big
black at the railroad-bridge; the fifteenth by mesainger's, and the
ninth (general parker) by birdsong's ferry-all to converge on
bolton. my corps crossed the big black during the th and th of
july, and marched for bolton, where we came in with general ord's
troops; but the ninth corps was delayed in crossing at birdsong's.
johnston had received timely notice of pemberton's surrender, and
was in full retreat for jackson. on the th all our troops reached
the neighborhood of clinton, the weather fearfully hot, and water
scarce. johnston had marched rapidly, and in retreating had caused
cattle, hogs, and sheep, to be driven into the ponds of water, and
there shot down; so that we had to haul their dead and stinking
carcasses out to use the water. on the th of july we had driven
the rebel army into jackson, where it turned at bay behind the
intrenchments, which had been enlarged and strengthened since our
former visit in may. we closed our lines about jackson; my corps
(fifteenth) held the centre, extending from the clinton to the
raymond road; ord's (thirteenth) on the right, reaching pearl river
below the town; and parker's (ninth) the left, above the town.
on the th we pressed close in, and shelled the town from every
direction. one of ords brigades (lauman's) got too close, and was
very roughly handled and driven back in disorder. general ord
accused the commander (general lauman) of having disregarded his
orders, and attributed to him personally the disaster and heavy
loss of men. he requested his relief, which i granted, and general
lauman went to the rear, and never regained his division. he died
after the war, in iowa, much respected, as before that time he had
been universally esteemed a most gallant and excellent officer. the
weather was fearfully hot, but we continued to press the siege day
and night, using our artillery pretty freely; and on the morning of
july th the place was found evacuated. general steele's division
was sent in pursuit as far as brandon (fourteen miles), but general
johnston had carried his army safely off, and pursuit in that hot
weather would have been fatal to my command.
reporting the fact to general grant, he ordered me to return, to
send general parkes's corps to haines's bluff, general ord's back
to vicksburg, and he consented that i should encamp my whole corps
near the big black, pretty much on the same ground we had occupied
before the movement, and with the prospect of a period of rest for
the remainder of the summer. we reached our camps on the th of
july.
meantime, a division of troops, commanded by brigadier-general
w. sooy smith, had been added to my corps. general smith applied
for and received a sick-leave on the th of july;
brigadier-general hugh ewing was assigned to its command; and from
that time it constituted the fourth division of the fifteenth army
corps.
port hudson had surrendered to general banks on the th of july
(a necessary consequence of the fall of vicksburg), and thus
terminated probably the most important enterprise of the civil
war—the recovery of the complete control of the mississippi
river, from its source to its mouth—or, in the language of
mr. lincoln, the mississippi went "unvexed to the sea."
i put my four divisions into handsome, clean camps, looking to
health and comfort alone, and had my headquarters in a beautiful
grove near the house of that same parson fox where i had found the
crowd of weeping rebel women waiting for the fate of their friends
in vicksburg.
the loss sustained by the fifteenth corps in the assault of may
th, at vicksburg, was mostly confined to the battalion of the
thirteenth regulars, whose commanding officer, captain washington,
was mortally wounded, and afterward died in the hands of the enemy,
which battalion lost seventy-seven men out of the two hundred and
fifty engaged; the eighty-third indiana (colonel spooner), and the
one hundred and twenty seventh illinois (lieutenant-colonel
eldridge), the aggregate being about two hundred.
in the assaults of the d, the loss in the fifteenth corps was
about six hundred.
in the attack on jackson, mississippi, during the th-th of
july, general ord reported the loss in the thirteenth army corps
seven hundred and sixty-two, of which five hundred and thirty-three
were confined to lauman's division; general parkes reported, in the
ninth corps, thirty-seven killed, two hundred and fifty-eight
wounded, and thirty-three missing: total, three hundred and
twenty-eight. in the fifteenth corps the loss was less; so that, in
the aggregate, the loss as reported by me at the time was less than
a thousand men, while we took that number alone of prisoners.
in general grant's entire army before vicksburg, composed of the
ninth, part of the sixteenth, and the whole of the thirteenth;
fifteenth, and seventeenth corps, the aggregate loss, as stated by
badeau, was:
killed: .......................
wounded:.......................
missing: ......................
total: ........................
whereas the confederate loss, as stated by the same author,
surrendered at vicksburg ..............
captured at champion hills.............
captured at big black bridge ..........
captured at port gibson................
captured with loring ..................
killed and wounded ....................
stragglers.............................
total..................................
besides which, "a large amount of public property, consisting of
railroads, locomotives, cars, steamers, cotton, guns, muskets,
ammunition, etc., etc., was captured in vicksburg."
the value of the capture of vicksburg, however, was not measured
by the list of prisoners, guns, and small-arms, but by the fact
that its possession secured the navigation of the great central
river of the continent, bisected fatally the southern confederacy,
and set the armies which had been used in its conquest free for
other purposes; and it so happened that the event coincided as to
time with another great victory which crowned our arms far away, at
gettysburg, pennsylvania. that was a defensive battle, whereas ours
was offensive in the highest acceptation of the term, and the two,
occurring at the same moment of time, should have ended the war;
but the rebel leaders were mad, and seemed determined that their
people should drink of the very lowest dregs of the cup of war,
which they themselves had prepared.
the campaign of vicksburg, in its conception and execution,
belonged exclusively to general grant, not only in the great whole,
but in the thousands of its details. i still retain many of his
letters and notes, all in his own handwriting, prescribing the
routes of march for divisions and detachments, specifying even the
amount of food and tools to be carried along. many persons gave his
adjutant general, rawlins, the credit for these things, but they
were in error; for no commanding general of an army ever gave more
of his personal attention to details, or wrote so many of his own
orders, reports, and letters, as general grant. his success at
vicksburg justly gave him great fame at home and abroad. the
president conferred on him the rank of major-general in the regular
army, the highest grade then existing by law; and general mcpherson
and i shared in his success by receiving similar commissions as
brigadier-generals in the regular army.
but our success at vicksburg produced other results not so
favorable to our cause—a general relaxation of effort, and
desire to escape the hard drudgery of camp: officers sought leaves
of absence to visit their homes, and soldiers obtained furloughs
and discharges on the most slender pretexts; even the general
government seemed to relax in its efforts to replenish our ranks
with new men, or to enforce the draft, and the politicians were
pressing their schemes to reorganize or patch up some form of civil
government, as fast as the armies gained partial possession of the
states.
in order to illustrate this peculiar phase of our civil war, i
give at this place copies of certain letters which have not
heretofore been published:
[private.]
washington, august , .
major-general w. t. sherman, vicksburg, mississippi
my dear general: the question of reconstruction in louisiana,
mississippi, and arkansas, will soon come up for decision of the
government, and not only the length of the war, but our ultimate
and complete success, will depend upon its decision. it is a
difficult matter, but i believe it can be successfully solved, if
the president will consult opinions of cool and discreet men, who
are capable of looking at it in all its bearings and effects. i
think he is disposed to receive the advice of our generals who have
been in these states, and know much more of their condition than
gassy politicians in congress. general banks has written pretty
fully, on the subject. i wrote to general grant, immediately, after
the fall of vicksburg, for his views in regard to mississippi, but
he has not yet answered.
i wish you would consult with grant, mcpherson, and others of cool,
good judgment, and write me your views fully, as i may wish to use
them with the president. you had better write me unofficially, and
then your letter will not be put on file, and cannot hereafter be
used against you. you have been in washington enough to know how
every thing a man writes or says is picked up by his enemies and
misconstrued. with kind wishes for your further success,
i am yours truly,
[private and confidential.]
camp on big black, mississippi, september  
h. w. halleck, commander-in-chief, washington, d. c.
dear general: i have received your letter of august th, and with
pleasure confide to you fully my thoughts on the important matters
you suggest, with absolute confidence that you will use what is
valuable, and reject the useless or superfluous.
that part of the continent of north america known as louisiana,
mississippi, and arkansas, is in my judgment the key to the whole
interior. the valley of the mississippi is america, and, although
railroads have changed the economy of intercommunication, yet the
water-channels still mark the lines of fertile land, and afford
cheap carriage to the heavy products of it.
the inhabitants of the country on the monongahela, the illinois,
the minnesota, the yellowstone, and osage, are as directly
concerned in the security of the lower mississippi as are those who
dwell on its very banks in louisiana; and now that the nation has
recovered its possession, this generation of men will make a
fearful mistake if they again commit its charge to a people liable
to misuse their position, and assert, as was recently done, that,
because they dwelt on the banks of this mighty stream, they had a
right to control its navigation.
i would deem it very unwise at this time, or for years to come, to
revive the state governments of louisiana, etc., or to institute in
this quarter any civil government in which the local people have
much to say. they had a government so mild and paternal that they
gradually forgot they had any at all, save what they themselves
controlled; they asserted an absolute right to seize public moneys,
forts, arms, and even to shut up the natural avenues of travel and
commerce. they chose war—they ignored and denied all the
obligations of the solemn contract of government and appealed to
force.
we accepted the issue, and now they begin to realize that war is a
two-edged sword, and it may be that many of the inhabitants cry for
peace. i know them well, and the very impulses of their nature; and
to deal with the inhabitants of that part of the south which
borders on the great river, we must recognize the classes into
which they have divided themselves:
first. the large planters, owning lands, slaves, and all kinds of
personal property. these are, on the whole, the ruling class. they
are educated, wealthy, and easily approached. in some districts
they are bitter as gall, and have given up slaves, plantations, and
all, serving in the armies of the confederacy; whereas, in others,
they are conservative. none dare admit a friendship for us, though
they say freely that they were at the outset opposed to war and
disunion. i know we can manage this class, but only by action.
argument is exhausted, and words have lost their usual meaning.
nothing but the logic of events touches their understanding; but,
of late, this has worked a wonderful change. if our country were
like europe, crowded with people, i would say it would be easier to
replace this class than to reconstruct it, subordinate to the
policy of the nation; but, as this is not the case, it is better to
allow the planters, with individual exceptions, gradually to
recover their plantations, to hire any species of labor, and to
adapt themselves to the new order of things. still, their
friendship and assistance to reconstruct order out of the present
ruin cannot be depended on. they watch the operations of our
armies, and hope still for a southern confederacy that will restore
to them the slaves and privileges which they feel are otherwise
lost forever. in my judgment, we have two more battles to win
before we should even bother our minds with the idea of restoring
civil order—viz., one near meridian, in november, and one
near shreveport, in february and march next, when red river is
navigable by our gunboats. when these are done, then, and not until
then, will the planters of louisiana, arkansas, and mississippi,
submit. slavery is already gone, and, to cultivate the land, negro
or other labor must be hired. this, of itself, is a vast
revolution, and time must be afforded to allow men to adjust their
minds and habits to this new order of things. a civil government of
the representative type would suit this class far less than a pure
military role, readily adapting itself to actual occurrences, and
able to enforce its laws and orders promptly and
emphatically.
second. the smaller farmers, mechanics, merchants, and laborers.
this class will probably number three-quarters of the whole; have,
in fact, no real interest in the establishment of a southern
confederacy, and have been led or driven into war on the false
theory that they were to be benefited somehow—they knew not
how. they are essentially tired of the war, and would slink back
home if they could. these are the real tiers etat of the south, and
are hardly worthy a thought; for they swerve to and fro according
to events which they do not comprehend or attempt to shape. when
the time for reconstruction comes, they will want the old political
system of caucuses, legislatures, etc., to amuse them and make them
believe they are real sovereigns; but in all things they will
follow blindly the lead of the planters. the southern politicians,
who understand this class, use them as the french do their
masses—seemingly consult their prejudices, while they make
their orders and enforce them. we should do the same.
third. the union men of the south. i must confess i have little
respect for this class. they allowed a clamorous set of demagogues
to muzzle and drive them as a pack of curs. afraid of shadows, they
submit tamely to squads of dragoons, and permit them, without a
murmur, to burn their cotton, take their horses, corn, and every
thing; and, when we reach them, they are full of complaints if our
men take a few fence-rails for fire, or corn to feed our horses.
they give us no assistance or information, and are loudest in their
complaints at the smallest excesses of our soldiers. their sons,
horses, arms, and every thing useful, are in the army against us,
and they stay at home, claiming all the exemptions of peaceful
citizens. i account them as nothing in this great game of
war.
fourth. the young bloods of the south: sons of planters, lawyers
about towns, good billiard-players and sportsmen, men who never did
work and never will. war suits them, and the rascals are brave,
fine riders, bold to rashness, and dangerous subjects in every
sense. they care not a sou for niggers, land, or any thing. they
hate yankees per se, and don't bother their brains about the past,
present, or future. as long as they have good horses, plenty of
forage, and an open country, they are happy. this is a larger class
than most men suppose, and they are the most dangerous set of men
that this war has turned loose upon the world. they are splendid
riders, first-rate shots, and utterly reckless. stewart, john
morgan, forrest, and jackson, are the types and leaders of this
class. these men must all be killed or employed by us before we can
hope for peace. they have no property or future, and therefore
cannot be influenced by any thing, except personal considerations.
i have two brigades of these fellows in my front, commanded by
cosby, of the old army, and whitfield, of texas. stephen d. lee is
in command of the whole. i have frequent interviews with their
officers, a good understanding with them, and am inclined to think,
when the resources of their country are exhausted, we must employ
them. they are the best cavalry in the world, but it will tax mr.
chase's genius for finance to supply them with horses. at present
horses cost them nothing; for they take where they find, and don't
bother their brains as to who is to pay for them; the same may be
said of the cornfields, which have, as they believe, been
cultivated by a good-natured people for their special benefit. we
propose to share with them the free use of these cornfields,
planted by willing hands, that will never gather the crops.
now that i have sketched the people who inhabit the district of
country under consideration, i will proceed to discuss the
future.
a civil government now, for any part of it, would be simply
ridiculous. the people would not regard it, and even the military
commanders of the antagonistic parties would treat it lightly.
governors would be simply petitioners for military assistance, to
protect supposed friendly interests, and military commanders would
refuse to disperse and weaken their armies for military reasons.
jealousies would arise between the two conflicting powers, and,
instead of contributing to the end of the war, would actually defer
it. therefore, i contend that the interests of the united states,
and of the real parties concerned, demand the continuance of the
simple military role, till after all the organized armies of the
south are dispersed, conquered, and subjugated.
the people of all this region are represented in the army of
virginia, at charleston, mobile, and chattanooga. they have sons
and relations in each of the rebel armies, and naturally are
interested in their fate. though we hold military possession of the
key-points of their country, still they contend, and naturally,
that should lee succeed in virginia, or bragg at chattanooga, a
change will occur here also. we cannot for this reason attempt to
reconstruct parts of the south as we conquer it, till all idea of
the establishment of a southern confederacy is abandoned. we should
avail ourselves of the present lull to secure the strategical
points that will give us an advantage in the future military
movements, and we should treat the idea of civil government as one
in which we as a nation have a minor or subordinate interest. the
opportunity is good to impress on the population the truth that
they are more interested in civil government than we are; and that,
to enjoy the protection of laws, they most not be passive observers
of events, but must aid and sustain the constituted authorities in
enforcing the laws; they must not only submit themselves, but
should pay their share of taxes, and render personal services when
called on.
it seems to me, in contemplating the history of the past two years,
that all the people of our country, north, south, east, and west,
have been undergoing a salutary political schooling, learning
lessons which might have been acquired from the experience of other
people; but we had all become so wise in our own conceit that we
would only learn by actual experience of our own. the people even
of small and unimportant localities, north as well as south, had
reasoned themselves into the belief that their opinions were
superior to the aggregated interest of the whole nation. half our
territorial nation rebelled, on a doctrine of secession that they
themselves now scout; and a real numerical majority actually
believed that a little state was endowed with such sovereignty that
it could defeat the policy of the great whole. i think the present
war has exploded that notion, and were this war to cease now, the
experience gained, though dear, would be worth the expense.
another great and important natural truth is still in contest, and
can only be solved by war. numerical majorities by vote have been
our great arbiter. heretofore all men have cheerfully submitted to
it in questions left open, but numerical majorities are not
necessarily physical majorities. the south, though numerically
inferior, contend they can whip the northern superiority of
numbers, and therefore by natural law they contend that they are
not bound to submit. this issue is the only real one, and in my
judgment all else should be deferred to it. war alone can decide
it, and it is the only question now left for us as a people to
decide. can we whip the south? if we can, our numerical majority
has both the natural and constitutional right to govern them. if we
cannot whip them, they contend for the natural right to select
their own government, and they have the argument. our armies must
prevail over theirs; our officers, marshals, and courts, must
penetrate into the innermost recesses of their land, before we have
the natural right to demand their submission.
i would banish all minor questions, assert the broad doctrine that
as a nation the united states has the right, and also the physical
power, to penetrate to every part of our national domain, and that
we will do it—that we will do it in our own time and in our
own way; that it makes no difference whether it be in one year, or
two, or ten, or twenty; that we will remove and destroy every
obstacle, if need be, take every life, every acre of land, every
particle of property, every thing that to us seems proper; that we
will not cease till the end is attained; that all who do not aid us
are enemies, and that we will not account to them for our acts. if
the people of the south oppose, they do so at their peril; and if
they stand by, mere lookers-on in this domestic tragedy, they have
no right to immunity, protection, or share in the final
results.
i even believe and contend further that, in the north, every member
of the nation is bound by both natural and constitutional law to
"maintain and defend the government against all its enemies and
opposers whomsoever." if they fail to do it they are derelict, and
can be punished, or deprived of all advantages arising from the
labors of those who do. if any man, north or south, withholds his
share of taxes, or his physical assistance in this, the crisis of
our history, he should be deprived of all voice in the future
elections of this country, and might be banished, or reduced to the
condition of a mere denizen of the land.
war is upon us, none can deny it. it is not the choice of the
government of the united states, but of a faction; the government
was forced to accept the issue, or to submit to a degradation fatal
and disgraceful to all the inhabitants. in accepting war, it should
be "pure and simple" as applied to the belligerents. i would keep
it so, till all traces of the war are effaced; till those who
appealed to it are sick and tired of it, and come to the emblem of
our nation, and sue for peace. i would not coax them, or even meet
them half-way, but make them so sick of war that generations would
pass away before they would again appeal to it.
i know what i say when i repeat that the insurgents of the south
sneer at all overtures looking to their interests. they scorn the
alliance with the copperheads; they tell me to my face that they
respect grant, mcpherson, and our brave associates who fight
manfully and well for a principle, but despise the copperheads and
sneaks at the north, who profess friendship for the south and
opposition to the war, as mere covers for their knavery and
poltroonery.
god knows that i deplore this fratricidal war as much as any man
living, but it is upon us, a physical fact; and there is only one
honorable issue from it. we must fight it out, army against army,
and man against man; and i know, and you know, and civilians begin
to realize the fact, that reconciliation and reconstruction will be
easier through and by means of strong, well-equipped, and organized
armies than through any species of conventions that can be framed.
the issues are made, and all discussion is out of place and
ridiculous. the section of thirty-pounder parrott rifles now
drilling before my tent is a more convincing argument than the
largest democratic meeting the state of new york can possibly
assemble at albany; and a simple order of the war department to
draft enough men to fill our skeleton regiments would be more
convincing as to our national perpetuity than an humble pardon to
jeff. davis and all his misled host.
the only government needed or deserved by the states of louisiana,
arkansas, and mississippi, now exists in grant's army. this needs,
simply, enough privates to fill its ranks; all else will follow in
due season. this army has its well-defined code of laws and
practice, and can adapt itself to the wants and necessities of a
city, the country, the rivers, the sea, indeed to all parts of this
land. it better subserves the interest and policy of the general
government, and the people here prefer it to any weak or servile
combination that would at once, from force of habit, revive sad
perpetuate local prejudices and passions. the people of this
country have forfeited all right to a voice in the councils of the
nation. they know it and feel it, and in after-years they will be
the better citizens from the dear bought experience of the present
crisis. let them learn now, and learn it well, that good citizens
must obey as well as command. obedience to law, absolute—yea,
even abject—is the lesson that this war, under providence,
will teach the free and enlightened american citizen. as a nation,
we shall be the better for it.
i never have apprehended foreign interference in our family
quarrel. of coarse, governments founded on a different and it may
be an antagonistic principle with ours naturally feel a pleasure at
our complications, and, it may be, wish our downfall; but in the
end england and france will join with us in jubilation at the
triumph of constitutional government over faction. even now the
english manifest this. i do not profess to understand napoleon's
design in mexico, and i do not, see that his taking military
possession of mexico concerns us. we have as much territory now as
we want. the mexicans have failed in self-government, and it was a
question as to what nation she should fall a prey. that is now
solved, and i don't see that we are damaged. we have the finest
part of the north american continent, all we can people and can
take care of; and, if we can suppress rebellion in our own land,
and compose the strife generated by it, we shall have enough
people, resources, and wealth, if well combined, to defy
interference from any and every quarter.
i therefore hope the government of the united states will continue,
as heretofore, to collect, in well-organized armies, the physical
strength of the nation; applying it, as heretofore, in asserting
the national authority; and in persevering, without relaxation, to
the end. this, whether near or far off, is not for us to say; but,
fortunately, we have no choice. we must succeed—no other
choice is left us except degradation. the south must be ruled by
us, or she will rule us. we must conquer them, or ourselves be
conquered. there is no middle course. they ask, and will have,
nothing else, and talk of compromise is bosh; for we know they
would even scorn the offer.
i wish the war could have been deferred for twenty years, till the
superabundant population of the north could flow in and replace the
losses sustained by war; but this could not be, and we are forced
to take things as they are.
all therefore i can now venture to advise is to raise the draft to
its maximum, fill the present regiments to as large a standard as
possible, and push the war, pure and simple. great attention should
be paid to the discipline of our armies, for on them may be founded
the future stability of the government.
the cost of the war is, of course, to be considered, but finances
will adjust themselves to the actual state of affairs; and, even if
we would, we could not change the cost. indeed, the larger the cost
now, the less will it be in the end; for the end must be attained
somehow, regardless of loss of life and treasure, and is merely a
question of time.
excuse so long a letter. with great respect, etc.,
w. t. sherman, major-general.
general halleck, on receipt of this letter, telegraphed me that
mr. lincoln had read it carefully, and had instructed him to obtain
my consent to have it published. at the time, i preferred not to be
drawn into any newspaper controversy, and so wrote to general
halleck; and the above letter has never been, to my knowledge,
published; though mr. lincoln more than once referred to it with
marks of approval.
camp on big black, september , 
brigadier-general j. a. rawlins,
acting assistant adjutant-general, vicksburg.
dear general: i inclose for your perusal, and for you to read to
general grant such parts as you deem interesting, letters received
by me from prof. mahan and general halleck, with my answers. after
you have read my answer to general halleck, i beg you to inclose it
to its address, and return me the others.
i think prof. mahan's very marked encomium upon the campaign of
vicksburg is so flattering to general grant, that you may offer to
let him keep the letter, if he values such a testimonial. i have
never written a word to general halleck since my report of last
december, after the affair at chickasaw, except a short letter a
few days ago, thanking him for the kind manner of his transmitting
to me the appointment of brigadier-general. i know that in
washington i am incomprehensible, because at the outset of the war
i would not go it blind and rush headlong into a war unprepared and
with an utter ignorance of its extent and purpose. i was then
construed unsound; and now that i insist on war pure and simple,
with no admixture of civil compromises, i am supposed vindictive.
you remember what polonius said to his son laertes: "beware of
entrance to a quarrel; but, being in, bear it, that the opposed may
beware of thee." what is true of the single man, is equally true of
a nation. our leaders seemed at first to thirst for the quarrel,
willing, even anxious, to array against us all possible elements of
opposition; and now, being in, they would hasten to quit long
before the "opposed" has received that lesson which he needs. i
would make this war as severe as possible, and show no symptoms of
tiring till the south begs for mercy; indeed, i know, and you know,
that the end would be reached quicker by such a course than by any
seeming yielding on our part. i don't want our government to be
bothered by patching up local governments, or by trying to
reconcile any class of men. the south has done her worst, and now
is the time for us to pile on our blows thick and fast.
instead of postponing the draft till after the elections, we ought
now to have our ranks full of drafted men; and, at best, if they
come at all, they will reach us when we should be in motion.
i think general halleck would like to have the honest, candid
opinions of all of us, viz., grant, mcpherson, and sherman. i have
given mine, and would prefer, of course, that it should coincide
with the others. still, no matter what my opinion may be, i can
easily adapt my conduct to the plane of others, and am only too
happy when i find theirs better, than mine.
if no trouble, please show halleck's letter to mcpherson, and ask
him to write also. i know his regiments are like mine (mere
squads), and need filling up. yours truly,
w. t. sherman, major-general.
after the fall of vicksburg, and its corollary, port hudson, the
mississippi river was wholly in the possession of the union forces,
and formed a perfect line of separation in the territories of our
opponents. thenceforth, they could not cross it save by stealth,
and the military affairs on its west bank became unimportant.
grant's army had seemingly completed its share of the work of war,
and lay, as it were, idle for a time. in person general grant went
to new orleans to confer with general banks, and his victorious
army was somewhat dispersed. parke's corps (ninth) returned to
kentucky, and afterward formed part of the army of the ohio, under
general burnside; ord's corps (thirteenth) was sent down to
natchez, and gradually drifted to new orleans and texas; mcphersons
(seventeenth) remained in and near vicksburg; hurlbut's (sixteenth)
was at memphis; and mine (fifteenth) was encamped along the big
black, about twenty miles east of vicksburg. this corps was
composed of four divisions: steele's (the first) was posted at and
near the railroad-bridge; blair's (the second), next in order, near
parson fox's; the third division (tuttle's) was on the ridge about
the head of bear creek; and the fourth (ewing's) was at messinger's
ford. my own headquarters were in tents in a fine grove of old oaks
near parson fox's house, and the battalion of the thirteenth
regulars was the headquarters guard.
all the camps were arranged for health, comfort, rest, and
drill. it being midsummer, we did not expect any change till the
autumn months, and accordingly made ourselves as comfortable as
possible. there was a short railroad in operation from vicksburg to
the bridge across the big black, whence supplies in abundance were
hauled to our respective camps. with a knowledge of this fact mrs.
sherman came down from ohio with minnie, lizzie, willie, and tom,
to pay us a visit in our camp at parson fog's. willie was then nine
years old, was well advanced for his years, and took the most
intense interest in the affairs of the army. he was a great
favorite with the soldiers, and used to ride with me on horseback
in the numerous drills and reviews of the time. he then had the
promise of as long a life as any of my children, and displayed more
interest in the war than any of them. he was called a "sergeant" in
the regular battalion, learned the manual of arms, and regularly
attended the parade and guard-mounting of the thirteenth, back of
my camp. we made frequent visits to vicksburg, and always stopped
with general mcpherson, who had a large house, and boarded with a
family (mrs. edwards's) in which were several interesting young
ladies. general grant occupied another house (mrs. lum's) in
vicksburg during that summer, and also had his family with him. the
time passed very agreeably, diversified only by little events of
not much significance, among which i will recount only one.
while, we occupied the west bank of the big black, the east bank
was watched by a rebel cavalry-division, commanded by general
armstrong. he had four brigades, commanded by generals whitfield,
stark, cosby, and wirt adams. quite frequently they communicated
with us by flags of truce on trivial matters, and we reciprocated;
merely to observe them. one day a flag of truce, borne by a captain
b...., of louisville, kentucky, escorted by about twenty-five men,
was reported at messinger's ferry, and i sent orders to let them
come right into my tent. this brought them through the camps of the
fourth division, and part of the second; and as they drew up in
front of my tent, i invited captain b.... and another officer with
him (a major from mobile) to dismount, to enter my tent, and to
make themselves at home. their escort was sent to join mine, with
orders to furnish them forage and every thing they wanted. b....
had brought a sealed letter for general grant at vicksburg, which
was dispatched to him. in the evening we had a good supper, with
wine and cigars, and, as we sat talking, b.... spoke of his father
and mother, in louisville, got leave to write them a long letter
without its being read by any one, and then we talked about the
war. he said: "what is the use of your persevering? it is simply
impossible to subdue eight millions of people;" asserting that "the
feeling in the south had become so embittered that a reconciliation
was impossible." i answered that, "sitting as we then were, we
appeared very comfortable, and surely there was no trouble in our
becoming friends." "yes," said he, "that is very true of us, but we
are gentlemen of education, and can easily adapt ourselves to any
condition of things; but this would not apply equally well to the
common people, or to the common soldiers." i took him out to the
camp-fires behind the tent, and there were the men of his escort
and mine mingled together, drinking their coffee, and happy as
soldiers always seem. i asked b.... what he thought of that, and he
admitted that i had the best of the argument. before i dismissed
this flag of truce, his companion consulted me confidentially as to
what disposition he ought to make of his family, then in mobile,
and i frankly gave him the best advice i could.
while we were thus lying idle in camp on the big black, the army
of the cumberland, under general rosecrans, was moving against
bragg at chattanooga; and the army of the ohio, general burnside,
was marching toward east tennessee. general rosecrans was so
confident of success that he somewhat scattered his command,
seemingly to surround and capture bragg in chattanooga; but the
latter, reenforced from virginia, drew out of chattanooga,
concentrated his army at lafayette, and at chickamauga fell on
rosecrans, defeated him, and drove him into chattanooga. the whole
country seemed paralyzed by this unhappy event; and the authorities
in washington were thoroughly stampeded. from the east the eleventh
corps (slocum), and the twelfth corps (howard), were sent by rail
to nashville, and forward under command of general hooker; orders
were also sent to general grant, by halleck, to send what
reenforcements he could spare immediately toward chattanooga.
bragg had completely driven rosecrans's army into chattanooga;
the latter was in actual danger of starvation, and the railroad to
his rear seemed inadequate to his supply. the first intimation
which i got of this disaster was on the d of september, by an
order from general grant to dispatch one of my divisions
immediately into vicksburg, to go toward chattanooga, and i
designated the first, general osterhaus—steele meantime
having been appointed to the command of the department of arkansas,
and had gone to little rock. general osterhaus marched the same
day, and on the d i was summoned to vicksburg in person, where
general grant showed me the alarming dispatches from general
halleck, which had been sent from memphis by general hurlbut, and
said, on further thought, that he would send me and my whole corps.
but, inasmuch as one division of mcpherson's corps (john e.
smith's) had already started, he instructed me to leave one of my
divisions on the big black, and to get the other two ready to
follow at once. i designated the second, then commanded by
brigadier-general giles a. smith, and the fourth, commanded by
brigadier-general corse.
on the th i returned to my camp on big black, gave all the
necessary orders for these divisions to move, and for the third
(tittle's) to remain, and went into vicksburg with my family. the
last of my corps designed for this expedition started from camp on
the th, reached vicksburg the th, and were embarked on boats
provided for them. general halleck's dispatches dwelt upon the fact
that general rosecrans's routes of supply were overtaxed, and that
we should move from memphis eastward, repairing railroads as we
progressed, as far as athens, alabama, whence i was to report to
general rosecrans, at chattanooga, by letter.
i took passage for myself and family in the steamer atlantic,
captain henry mcdougall. when the boat was ready to start, willie
was missing. mrs. sherman supposed him to have been with me,
whereas i supposed he was with her. an officer of the thirteenth
went up to general mcpherson's house for him, and soon returned,
with captain clift leading him, carrying in his hands a small
double-barreled shot gun; and i joked him about carrying away
captured property. in a short time we got off. as we all stood on
the guards to look at our old camps at young's point, i remarked
that willie was not well, and he admitted that he was sick. his
mother put him to bed, and consulted dr. roler, of the fifty-fifth
illinois, who found symptoms of typhoid fever. the river was low;
we made slow progress till above helena; and, as we approached
memphis, dr. roler told me that willie's life was in danger, and he
was extremely anxious to reach memphis for certain medicines and
for consultation. we arrived at memphis on the d of october,
carried willie up to the gayoso hotel, and got the most experienced
physician there, who acted with dr. roler, but he sank rapidly, and
died the evening of the d of october. the blow was a terrible one
to us all, so sudden and so unexpected, that i could not help
reproaching myself for having consented to his visit in that sickly
region in the summer-time. of all my children, he seemed the most
precious. born in san francisco, i had watched with intense
interest his development, and he seemed more than any of the
children to take an interest in my special profession. mrs.
sherman, minnie, lizzie, and tom, were with him at the time, and we
all, helpless and overwhelmed, saw him die. being in the very midst
of an important military enterprise, i had hardly time to pause and
think of my personal loss. we procured a metallic casket, and had a
military funeral, the battalion of the thirteenth united states
regulars acting as escort from the gayoso hotel to the steamboat
grey eagle, which conveyed him and my family up to cairo, whence
they proceeded to our home at lancaster, ohio, where he was buried.
i here give my letter to captain c. c. smith, who commanded the
battalion at the time, as exhibiting our intense feelings:
october , , midnight
captain c. c. smith, commanding battalion thirteenth united states
regulars.
my dear friend: i cannot sleep to-night till i record an expression
of the deep feelings of my heart to you, and to the officers and
soldiers of the battalion, for their kind behavior to my poor
child. i realize that you all feel for my family the attachment of
kindred, and i assure you of full reciprocity. consistent with a
sense of duty to my profession and office, i could not leave my
post, and sent for the family to come to me in that fatal climate,
and in that sickly period of the year, and behold the result! the
child that bore my name, and in whose future i reposed with more
confidence than i did in my own plan of life, now floats a mere
corpse, seeking a grave in a distant land, with a weeping mother,
brother, and sisters, clustered about him. for myself, i ask no
sympathy. on, on i must go, to meet a soldier's fate, or live to
see our country rise superior to all factions, till its flag is
adored and respected by ourselves and by all the powers of the
earth.
but willie was, or thought he was, a sergeant in the thirteenth. i
have seen his eye brighten, his heart beat, as he beheld the
battalion under arms, and asked me if they were not real soldiers.
child as he was, he had the enthusiasm, the pure love of truth,
honor, and love of country, which should animate all
soldiers.
god only knows why he should die thus young. he is dead, but will
not be forgotten till those who knew him in life have followed him
to that same mysterious end.
please convey to the battalion my heart-felt thanks, and assure
each and all that if in after-years they call on me or mine, and
mention that they were of the thirteenth regulars when willie was a
sergeant, they will have a key to the affections of my family that
will open all it has; that we will share with them our last
blanket, our last crust! your friend,
w. t. sherman, major-general.
long afterward, in the spring of , we had his body
disinterred and brought to st. louis, where he is now buried in a
beautiful spot, in calvary cemetery, by the side of another child,
"charles," who was born at lancaster, in the summer of , died
early, and was buried at notre dame, indiana. his body was
transferred at the same time to the same spot. over willie's grave
is erected a beautiful marble monument, designed and executed by
the officers and soldiers, of that battalion which claimed him as a
sergeant and comrade.
during the summer and fall of  major-general s. a. hurlbut
was in command at memphis. he supplied me copies of all dispatches
from washington, and all the information he possessed of the events
about chattanooga. two of these dispatches cover all essential
points:
washington city, september , — p.m.
major-general s. a. hurlbut, memphis:
all the troops that can possibly be spared in west tennessee and on
the mississippi river should be sent without delay to assist
general rosecrans on the tennessee river.
urge sherman to act with all possible promptness.
if you have boats, send them down to bring up his troops.
information just received indicates that a part of lee's army has
been sent to reenforce bragg.
h. w. halleck, general-in-chief.
washington, september , — p.m.
major-general s. a. hurlbut, memphis, tennessee:
give me definite information of the number of troops sent toward
decatur, and where they are. also, what other troops are to follow,
and when.
has any thing been heard from the troops ordered from
vicksburg?
no efforts must be spared to support rosecrans's right, and to
guard the crossings of the tennessee river.
h. w. halleck, general-in-chief.
my special orders were to repair the memphis & charleston
railroad eastward as i progressed, as far as athens, alabama, to
draw supplies by that route, so that, on reaching athens, we should
not be dependent on the roads back to nashville, already overtaxed
by the demand of rosecrans's army.
on reaching memphis, october d, i found that osterhaus's
division had already gone by rail as far as corinth, and than john
e. smith's division was in the act of starting by cars. the second
division, then commanded by brigadier-general giles a. smith,
reached memphis at the same time with me; and the fourth division,
commanded by brigadier-general john m. corse, arrived a day or two
after. the railroad was in fair condition as far as corinth,
ninety-six miles, but the road was badly stocked with locomotives
and cars, so that it took until the th to get off the second
division, when i gave orders for the fourth division and
wagon-trains to march by the common road.
on sunday morning, october th, with a special train loaded
with our orderlies and clerks, the horses of our staff, the
battalion of the thirteenth united states regulars, and a few
officers going forward to join their commands, among them
brigadier-general hugh ewing, i started for corinth.
at germantown, eight miles, we passed corse's division (fourth)
on the march, and about noon the train ran by the depot at
colliersville, twenty-six miles out. i was in the rear car with my
staff, dozing, but observed the train slacking speed and stopping
about half a mile beyond the depot. i noticed some soldiers running
to and fro, got out at the end of the car, and soon colonel anthony
(silty-sixth indiana), who commanded the post, rode up and said
that his pickets had just been driven in, and there was an
appearance of an attack by a large force of cavalry coming from the
southeast. i ordered the men to get off the train, to form on the
knoll near the railroad-cut, and soon observed a rebel officer
riding toward us with a white flag. colonel anthony and colonel
dayton (one of my aides) were sent to meet him, and to keep him in
conversation as long as possible. they soon returned, saying it was
the adjutant of the rebel general chalmers, who demanded the
surrender of the place. i instructed them to return and give a
negative answer, but to delay him as much as possible, so as to
give us time for preparation. i saw anthony, dayton, and the rebel
bearer of the flag, in conversation, and the latter turn his horse
to ride back, when i ordered colonel mccoy to run to the station,
and get a message over the wires as quick as possible to memphis
and germantown, to hurry forward corse's division. i then ordered
the train to back to the depot, and drew back the battalion of
regulars to the small earth redoubt near it. the depot-building was
of brick, and had been punctured with loop-holes. to its east,
about two hundred yards, was a small square earthwork or fort, into
which were put a part of the regulars along with the company of the
sixty-sixth indiana already there. the rest of the men were
distributed into the railroad-cut, and in some shallow
rifle-trenches near the depot. we had hardly made these
preparations when the enemy was seen forming in a long line on the
ridge to the south, about four hundred yards off, and soon after
two parties of cavalry passed the railroad on both sides of us,
cutting the wires and tearing up some rails. soon they opened on us
with artillery (of which we had none), and their men were
dismounting and preparing to assault. to the south of us was an
extensive cornfield, with the corn still standing, and on the other
side was the town of colliersville. all the houses near, that could
give shelter to the enemy, were ordered to be set on fire, and the
men were instructed to keep well under cover and to reserve their
fire for the assault, which seemed inevitable. a long line of rebel
skirmishers came down through the cornfield, and two other parties
approached us along the railroad on both sides. in the fort was a
small magazine containing some cartridges. lieutenant james, a
fine, gallant fellow, who was ordnance-officer on my staff, asked
leave to arm the orderlies and clerks with some muskets which he
had found in the depot, to which i consented; he marched them into
the magazine, issued cartridges, and marched back to the depot to
assist in its defense. afterward he came to me, said a party of the
enemy had got into the woods near the depot, and was annoying him,
and he wanted to charge and drive it away. i advised him to be
extremely cautious, as our enemy vastly outnumbered us, and had
every advantage in position and artillery; but instructed him, if
they got too near, he might make a sally. soon after, i heard a
rapid fire in that quarter, and lieutenant. james was brought in on
a stretcher, with a ball through his breast, which i supposed to be
fatal.
[after the fight we sent him back to memphis, where his mother
and father came from their home on the north river to nurse him.
young james was recovering from his wound, but was afterward killed
by a fall from his horse, near his home, when riding with the
daughters of mr. hamilton fish, now secretary of state.]
the enemy closed down on us several times, and got possession of
the rear of our train, from which they succeeded in getting five of
our horses, among them my favorite mare dolly; but our men were
cool and practised shots (with great experience acquired at
vicksburg), and drove them back. with their artillery they knocked
to pieces our locomotive and several of the cars, and set fire to
the train; but we managed to get possession again, and extinguished
the fire. colonel audenreid, aide-de-camp, was provoked to find
that his valise of nice shirts had been used to kindle the fire.
the fighting continued all round us for three or four hours, when
we observed signs of drawing off, which i attributed to the
rightful cause, the rapid approach of corse's division, which
arrived about dark, having marched the whole distance from memphis,
twenty-six miles, on the double-quick. the next day we repaired
damages to the railroad and locomotive, and went on to corinth.
at corinth, on the th, i received the following important
dispatches:
memphis, october , — a.m.
arrived this morning. will be off in a few hours. my orders are
only to go to cairo, and report from there by telegraph. mcpherson
will be in canton to-day. he will remain there until sunday or
monday next, and reconnoitre as far eastward as possible with
cavalry, in the mean time.
u. s. grant, major-general.
washington, october , — p.m.
major-general w. t. sherman, corinth
yours of the th is received. the important matter to be attended
to is that of supplies. when eastport can be reached by boats, the
use of the railroad can be dispensed with; but until that time it
must be guarded as far as need. the kentucky railroad can barely
supply general rosecrans. all these matters must be left to your
judgment as circumstances may arise. should the enemy be so strong
as to prevent your going to athena, or connecting with general
rosecrans, you will nevertheless have assisted him greatly by
drawing away a part of the enemy's forces.
h. w. halleck, major-general.
on the th, with my staff and a small escort, i rode forward to
burnsville, and on the th to iuka, where, on the next day, i was
most agreeably surprised to hear of the arrival at eastport (only
ten miles off) of two gunboats, under the command of captain
phelps, which had been sent up the tennessee river by admiral
porter, to help us.
satisfied that, to reach athens and to communicate with general
rosecrans, we should have to take the route north of the tennessee
river, on the th i ordered the fourth division to cross at
eastport with the aid of the gunboats, and to move to florence.
about the same time, i received the general orders assigning
general grant to command the military division of the mississippi,
authorizing him, on reaching chattanooga, to supersede general
rosecrans by general george h. thomas, with other and complete
authority, as set, forth in the following letters of general
halleck, which were sent to me by general grant; and the same
orders devolved on me the command of the department and army of the
tennessee.
headquarters of the army washington, d.c., october , 
major-general u. s. grant, louisville.
general: you will receive herewith the orders of the president of
the united states, placing you in command of the departments of the
ohio, cumberland, and tennessee. the organization of these
departments will be changed as you may deem most practicable. you
will immediately proceed to chattanooga, and relieve general
rosecrans. you can communicate with generals burnside and sherman
by telegraph. a summary of the orders sent to these officers will
be sent to you immediately. it is left optional with you to
supersede general rosecrans by general g. h. thomas or not. any
other changes will be made on your request by telegram.
one of the first objects requiring your attention is the supply of
your armies. another is the security of the passes in the georgia
mountains, to shut out the enemy from tennessee and kentucky. you
will consult with general meigs and colonel scott in regard to
transportation and supplies.
should circumstances permit, i will visit you personally in a few
days for consultation.
h. w. halleck, general-in-chief.
headquarters of the army washington, d. c., october , .
major-general grant, louisville.
general: in compliance with my promise, i now proceed to give you a
brief statement of the objects aimed at by general rosecrans and
general burnside's movement into east tennessee, and of the
measures directed to be taken to attain these objects.
it has been the constant desire of the government, from the
beginning of the war, to rescue the loyal inhabitants of east
tennessee from the hands of the rebels, who fully appreciated the
importance of continuing their hold upon that country. in addition
to the large amount of agricultural products drawn from the upper
valley of the tennessee, they also obtained iron and other
materials from the vicinity of chattanooga. the possession of east
tennessee would cut off one of their most important railroad
communications, and threaten their manufactories at rome, atlanta,
etc.
when general buell was ordered into east tennessee in the summer of
, chattanooga was comparatively unprotected; but bragg reached
there before buell, and, by threatening his communications, forced
him to retreat on nashville and louisville. again, after the battle
of perryville, general buell was urged to pursue bragg's defeated
army, and drive it from east tennessee. the same was urged upon his
successor, but the lateness of the season or other causes prevented
further operations after the battle of stone river.
last spring, when your movements on the mississippi river had drawn
out of tennessee a large force of the enemy, i again urged general
rosecrans to take advantage of that opportunity to carry out his
projected plan of campaign, general burnside being ready to
cooperate, with a diminished but still efficient force. but he
could not be persuaded to act in time, preferring to lie still till
your campaign should be terminated. i represented to him, but
without avail, that by this delay johnston might be able to
reenforce bragg with the troops then operating against you.
when general rosecrans finally determined to advance, he was
allowed to select his own lines and plans for carrying out the
objects of the expedition. he was directed, however, to report his
movements daily, till he crossed the tennessee, and to connect his
left, so far as possible, with general burnside's right. general
burnside was directed to move simultaneously, connecting his right,
as far as possible, with general rosecrans's left so that, if the
enemy concentrated upon either army, the other could move to its
assistance. when general burnside reached kingston and knoxville,
and found no considerable number of the enemy in east tennessee, he
was instructed to move down the river and cooperate with general
rosecrans.
these instructions were repeated some fifteen times, but were not
carried out, general burnside alleging as an excuse that he
believed that bragg was in retreat, and that general rosecrans
needed no reenforcements. when the latter had gained possession of
chattanooga he was directed not to move on rome as he proposed, but
simply to hold the mountain-passes, so as to prevent the ingress of
the rebels into east tennessee. that object accomplished, i
considered the campaign as ended, at least for the present. future
operations would depend upon the ascertained strength and;
movements of the enemy. in other words, the main objects of the
campaign were the restoration of east tennessee to the union, and
by holding the two extremities of the valley to secure it from
rebel invasion.
the moment i received reliable information of the departure of
longstreet's corps from the army of the potomac, i ordered forward
to general rosecrans every available man in the department of the
ohio, and again urged general burnside to move to his assistance. i
also telegraphed to generals hurlbut, sherman, and yourself, to
send forward all available troops in your department. if these
forces had been sent to general rosecrans by nashville, they could
not have been supplied; i therefore directed them to move by
corinth and the tennessee river. the necessity of this has been
proved by the fact that the reinforcements sent to him from the
army of the potomac have not been able, for the want of railroad
transportation, to reach general rosecrans's army in the
field.
in regard to the relative strength of the opposing armies, it is
believed that general rosecrans when he first moved against bragg
had double, if not treble, his force. general burnside, also, had
more than double the force of buckner; and, even when bragg and
buckner united, rosecrans's army was very greatly superior in
number. even the eighteen thousand men sent from virginia, under
longstreet, would not have given the enemy the superiority. it is
now ascertained that the greater part of the prisoners parolled by
you at vicksburg, and general banks at port hudson, were illegally
and improperly declared exchanged, and forced into the ranks to
swell the rebel numbers at chickamauga. this outrageous act, in
violation of the laws of war, of the cartel entered into by the
rebel authorities, and of all sense of honor, gives us a useful
lesson in regard to the character of the enemy with whom we are
contending. he neither regards the rules of civilized warfare, nor
even his most solemn engagements. you may, therefore, expect to
meet in arms thousands of unexchanged prisoners released by you and
others on parole, not to serve again till duly exchanged.
although the enemy by this disgraceful means has been able to
concentrate in georgia and alabama a much larger force than we
anticipated, your armies will be abundantly able to defeat him.
your difficulty will not be in the want of men, but in the means of
supplying them at this season of the year. a single-track railroad
can supply an army of sixty or seventy thousand men, with the usual
number of cavalry and artillery; but beyond that number, or with a
large mounted force, the difficulty of supply is very great.
i do not know the present condition of the road from nashville to
decatur, but, if practicable to repair it, the use of that triangle
will be of great assistance to you. i hope, also, that the recent
rise of water in the cumberland and tennessee rivers will enable
you to employ water transportation to nashville, eastport, or
florence.
if you reoccupy the passes of lookout mountain, which should never
have been given up, you will be able to use the railroad and river
from bridgeport to chattanooga. this seems to me a matter of vital
importance, and should receive your early attention.
i submit this summary in the hope that it will assist you in fully
understanding the objects of the campaign, and the means of
attaining these objects. probably the secretary of war, in his
interviews with you at louisville, has gone over the same ground.
whatever measures you may deem proper to adopt under existing
circumstances, you will receive all possible assistance from the
authorities at washington. you have never, heretofore, complained
that such assistance has not been afforded you in your operations,
and i think you will have no cause of complaint in your present
campaign. very respectfully, your obedient servant,
h. w. halleck, general-in-chief
general frank p. blair, who was then ahead with the two
divisions of osterhaus and john e. smith, was temporarily assigned
to the command of the fifteenth corps. general hurlbut remained at
memphis in command of the sixteenth corps, and general mcpherson at
vicksburg with the seventeenth. these three corps made up the army
of the tennessee. i was still busy in pushing forward the repairs
to the railroad bridge at bear creek, and in patching up the many
breaks between it and tuscumbia, when on the th of october, as i
sat on the porch of a house, i was approached by a dirty,
black-haired individual with mixed dress and strange demeanor, who
inquired for me, and, on being assured that i was in fact the man,
he handed me a letter from general blair at tuscumbia, and another
short one, which was a telegraph-message from general grant at
chattanooga, addressed to me through general george crook,
commanding at huntsville, alabama, to this effect:
drop all work on memphis & charleston railroad, cross the
tennessee and hurry eastward with all possible dispatch toward
bridgeport, till you meet further orders from me.
the bearer of this message was corporal pike, who described to
me, in his peculiar way, that general crook had sent him in a
canoe; that he had paddled down the tennessee river, over muscle
shoals, was fired at all the way by guerrillas, but on reaching
tuscumbia he had providentially found it in possession of our
troops. he had reported to general blair, who sent him on to me at
iuka. this pike proved to be a singular character; his manner
attracted my notice at once, and i got him a horse, and had him
travel with us eastward to about elkton, whence i sent him back to
general crook at huntsville; but told him, if i could ever do him a
personal service, he might apply to me. the next spring when i was
in chattanooga, preparing for the atlanta campaign, corporal pike
made his appearance and asked a fulfillment of my promise. i
inquired what he wanted, and he said he wanted to do something
bold, something that would make him a hero. i explained to him,
that we were getting ready to go for joe johnston at dalton, that i
expected to be in the neighborhood of atlanta about the th of
july, and wanted the bridge across the savannah river at augusta,
georgia, to be burnt about that time, to produce alarm and
confusion behind the rebel army. i explained to pike that the
chances were three to one that he would be caught and hanged; but
the greater the danger the greater seemed to be his desire to
attempt it. i told him to select a companion, to disguise himself
as an east tennessee refugee, work his way over the mountains into
north carolina, and at the time appointed to float down the
savannah river and burn that bridge. in a few days he had made his
preparations and took his departure. the bridge was not burnt, and
i supposed that pike had been caught and hanged.
when we reached columbia, south carolina, in february, ,
just as we were leaving the town, in passing near the asylum, i
heard my name called, and saw a very dirty fellow followed by a
file of men running toward me, and as they got near i recognized
pike. he called to me to identify him as one of my men; he was then
a prisoner under guard, and i instructed the guard to bring him
that night to my camp some fifteen miles up the road, which was
done. pike gave me a graphic narrative of his adventures, which
would have filled a volume; told me how he had made two attempts to
burn the bridge, and failed; and said that at the time of our
entering columbia he was a prisoner in the hands of the rebels,
under trial for his life, but in the confusion of their retreat he
made his escape and got into our lines, where he was again made a
prisoner by our troops because of his looks. pike got some clothes,
cleaned up, and i used him afterward to communicate with
wilmington, north carolina. some time after the war, he was
appointed a lieutenant of the regular, cavalry, and was killed in
oregon, by the accidental discharge of a pistol. just before his
death he wrote me, saying that he was tired of the monotony of
garrison-life, and wanted to turn indian, join the cheyennes on the
plains, who were then giving us great trouble, and, after he had
gained their confidence, he would betray them into our hands. of
course i wrote him that he must try and settle down and become a
gentleman as well as an officer, apply himself to his duties, and
forget the wild desires of his nature, which were well enough in
time of war, but not suited to his new condition as an officer;
but, poor fellow i he was killed by an accident, which probably
saved him from a slower but harder fate.
at iuka i issued all the orders to mcpherson and hurlbut
necessary for the department of the tennessee during my absence,
and, further, ordered the collection of a force out of the
sixteenth corps, of about eight thousand men, to be commanded by
general g. m. dodge, with orders to follow as far east as athens,
tennessee, there to await instructions. we instantly discontinued
all attempts to repair the charleston railroad; and the remaining
three divisions of the fifteenth corps marched to eastport, crossed
the tennessee river by the aid of the gunboats, a ferry-boat, and a
couple of transports which had come up, and hurried eastward.
in person i crossed on the st of november, and rode forward to
florence, where i overtook ewing's division. the other divisions
followed rapidly. on the road to florence i was accompanied by my
staff, some clerks, and mounted orderlies. major ezra taylor was
chief of artillery, and one of his sons was a clerk at
headquarters. the latter seems to have dropped out of the column,
and gone to a farm house near the road. there was no organized
force of the rebel army north of the tennessee river, but the
country was full of guerrillas. a party of these pounced down on
the farm, caught young taylor and another of the clerks, and after
reaching florence, major taylor heard of the capture of his son,
and learned that when last seen he was stripped of his hat and
coat, was tied to the tail-board of a wagon, and driven rapidly to
the north of the road we had traveled. the major appealed to me to
do something for his rescue. i had no cavalry to send in pursuit,
but knowing that there was always an understanding between these
guerrillas and their friends who staid at home, i sent for three or
four of the principal men of florence (among them a mr. foster, who
had once been a senator in congress), explained to them the capture
of young taylor and his comrade, and demanded their immediate
restoration. they, of course, remonstrated, denied all knowledge of
the acts of these guerrillas, and claimed to be peaceful citizens
of alabama, residing at home. i insisted that these guerrillas were
their own sons and neighbors; that they knew their haunts, and
could reach them if they wanted, and they could effect the
restoration to us of these men; and i said, moreover, they must do
it within twenty-four hours, or i would take them, strip them of
their hats and coats, and tie them to the tail-boards of our wagons
till they were produced. they sent off messengers at once, and
young taylor and his comrade were brought back the next day.
resuming our march eastward by the large road, we soon reached
elk river, which was wide and deep, and could only be crossed by a
ferry, a process entirely too slow for the occasion; so i changed
the route more by the north, to elkton, winchester, and deckerd. at
this point we came in communication with the army of the
cumberland, and by telegraph with general grant, who was at
chattanooga. he reiterated his orders for me and my command to
hurry forward with all possible dispatch, and in person i reached
bridgeport during the night of november th, my troops following
behind by several roads. at bridgeport i found a garrison guarding
the railroad-bridge and pontoon bridge there, and staid with the
quartermaster, colonel william g. le due (who was my school-mate at
how's school in ). there i received a dispatch from general
grant, at chattanooga, to come up in person, leaving my troops to
follow as fast as possible. at that time there were two or three
small steamboats on the river, engaged in carrying stores up as far
as kelly's ferry. in one of these i took passage, and on reaching
kelly's ferry found orderlies, with one of general grant's private
horses, waiting for me, on which i rode into chattanooga, november
th. of course, i was heartily welcomed by generals grant, thomas,
and all, who realized the extraordinary efforts we had made to come
to their relief. the next morning we walked out to fort wood, a
prominent salient of the defenses of the place, and from its
parapet we had a magnificent view of the panorama. lookout
mountain, with its rebel flags and batteries, stood out boldly, and
an occasional shot fired toward wauhatchee or moccasin point gave
life to the scene. these shots could barely reach chattanooga, and
i was told that one or more shot had struck a hospital inside the
lines. all along missionary ridge were the tents of the rebel
beleaguering force; the lines of trench from lookout up toward the
chickamauga were plainly visible; and rebel sentinels, in a
continuous chain, were walking their posts in plain view, not a
thousand yards off. "why," said i, "general grant, you are
besieged;" and he said, "it is too true." up to that moment i had
no idea that things were so bad. the rebel lines actually extended
from the river, below the town, to the river above, and the army of
the cumberland was closely held to the town and its immediate
defenses. general grant pointed out to me a house on missionary
ridge, where general bragg's headquarters were known to be. he also
explained the situation of affairs generally; that the mules and
horses of thomas's army were so starved that they could not haul
his guns; that forage, corn, and provisions, were so scarce that
the men in hunger stole the few grains of corn that were given to
favorite horses; that the men of thomas's army had been so
demoralized by the battle of chickamauga that he feared they could
not be got out of their trenches to assume the offensive; that
bragg had detached longstreet with a considerable force up into
east tennessee, to defeat and capture burnside; that burnside was
in danger, etc.; and that he (grant) was extremely anxious to
attack bragg in position, to defeat him, or at least to force him
to recall longstreet. the army of the cumberland had so long been
in the trenches that he wanted my troops to hurry up, to take the
offensive first; after which, he had no doubt the cumberland army
would fight well. meantime the eleventh and twelfth corps, under
general hooker, had been advanced from bridgeport along the
railroad to wauhatchee, but could not as yet pass lookout mountain.
a pontoon-bridge had been thrown across the tennessee river at
brown's ferry, by which supplies were hauled into chattanooga from
kelly's and wauhatchee..
another bridge was in course of construction at chattanooga,
under the immediate direction of quartermaster-general meigs, but
at the time all wagons, etc., had to be ferried across by a
flying-bridge. men were busy and hard at work everywhere inside our
lines, and boats for another pontoon-bridge were being rapidly
constructed under brigadier-general w. f. smith, familiarly known
as "baldy smith," and this bridge was destined to be used by my
troops, at a point of the river about four miles above chattanooga,
just below the mouth of the chickamauga river. general grant
explained to me that he had reconnoitred the rebel line from
lookout mountain up to chickamauga, and he believed that the
northern portion of missionary ridge was not fortified at all; and
he wanted me, as soon as my troops got up, to lay the new
pontoon-bridge by night, cross over, and attack bragg's right flank
on that part of the ridge abutting on chickamauga creek, near the
tunnel; and he proposed that we should go at once to look at the
ground. in company with generals thomas, w. f. smith, brannan, and
others, we crossed by the flying-bridge, rode back of the hills
some four miles, left our horses, and got on a hill overlooking the
whole ground about the mouth of the chickamauga river, and across
to the missionary hills near the tunnel. smith and i crept down
behind a fringe of trees that lined the river-bank, to the very
point selected for the new bridge, where we sat for some time,
seeing the rebel pickets on the opposite bank, and almost hearing
their words.
having seen enough, we returned to chattanooga; and in order to
hurry up my command, on which so much depended, i started back to
kelly's in hopes to catch the steamboat that same evening; but on
my arrival the boat had gone. i applied to the commanding officer,
got a rough boat manned by four soldiers, and started down the
river by night. i occasionally took a turn at the oars to relieve
some tired man, and about midnight we reached shell mound, where
general whittaker, of kentucky, furnished us a new and good crew,
with which we reached bridgeport by daylight. i started ewings
division in advance, with orders to turn aside toward trenton, to
make the enemy believe we were going to turn braggs left by pretty
much the same road rosecrans had followed; but with the other three
divisions i followed the main road, via the big trestle at
whitesides, and reached general hooker's headquarters, just above
wauhatchee, on the th; my troops strung all the way back to
bridgeport. it was on this occasion that the fifteenth corps gained
its peculiar badge: as the men were trudging along the deeply-cut,
muddy road, of a cold, drizzly day, one of our western soldiers
left his ranks and joined a party of the twelfth corps at their
camp-fire. they got into conversation, the twelfth-corps men asking
what troops we were, etc., etc. in turn, our fellow (who had never
seen a corps-badge, and noticed that every thing was marked with a
star) asked if they were all brigadier-generals. of course they
were not, but the star was their corps-badge, and every wagon,
tent, hat, etc., had its star. then the twelfth-corps men inquired
what corps he belonged to, and he answered, "the fifteenth corps."
"what is your badge?" "why," said he (and he was an irishman),
suiting the action to the word, "forty rounds in the cartridge-box,
and twenty in the pocket." at that time blair commanded the corps;
but logan succeeded soon after, and, hearing the story, adopted the
cartridge-box and forty rounds as the corps-badge.
the condition of the roads was such, and the bridge at brown's
so frail, that it was not until the d that we got three of my
divisions behind the hills near the point indicated above
chattanooga for crossing the river. it was determined to begin the
battle with these three divisions, aided by a division of thomas's
army, commanded by general jeff. c. davis, that was already near
that point. all the details of the battle of chattanooga, so far as
i was a witness, are so fully given in my official report herewith,
that i need add nothing to it. it was a magnificent battle in its
conception, in its execution, and in its glorious results; hastened
somewhat by the supposed danger of burnside, at knoxville, yet so
completely successful, that nothing is left for cavil or
fault-finding. the first day was lowering and overcast, favoring us
greatly, because we wanted to be concealed from bragg, whose
position on the mountain-tops completely overlooked us and our
movements. the second day was beautifully clear, and many a time,
in the midst of its carnage and noise, i could not help stopping to
look across that vast field of battle, to admire its sublimity.
the object of general hooker's and my attacks on the extreme
flanks of bragg's position was, to disturb him to such an extent,
that he would naturally detach from his centre as against us, so
that thomas's army could break through his centre. the whole plan
succeeded admirably; but it was not until after dark that i learned
the complete success at the centre, and received general grant's
orders to pursue on the north side of chickamauga creek:
tennessee, nov. , 
major-general sherman.
general: no doubt you witnessed the handsome manner in which
thomas's troops carried missionary ridge this afternoon, and can
feel a just pride, too, in the part taken by the forces under your
command in taking first so much of the same range of hills, and
then in attracting the attention of so many of the enemy as to make
thomas's part certain of success. the neat thing now will be to
relieve burnside. i have heard from him to the evening of the d.
at that time he had from ten to twelve days' supplies, and spoke
hopefully of being able to hold out that length of time.
my plan is to move your forces out gradually until they reach the
railroad between cleveland and dalton. granger will move up the
south side of the tennessee with a column of twenty thousand men,
taking no wagons, or but few, with him. his men will carry four
days' rations, and the steamer chattanooga, loaded with rations,
will accompany the expedition.
i take it for granted that bragg's entire force has left. if not,
of course, the first thing is to dispose of him. if he has gone,
the only thing necessary to do to-morrow will be to send out a
reconnoissance to ascertain the whereabouts of the enemy. yours
truly,
u. s. grant, major-general.
p. s.-on reflection, i think we will push bragg with all our
strength to-morrow, and try if we cannot out off a good portion of
his rear troops and trains. his men have manifested a strong
disposition to desert for some time past, and we will now give them
a chance. i will instruct thomas accordingly. move the advance
force early, on the most easterly road taken by the enemy. u. s.
this compelled me to reverse our column, so as to use the bridge
across the chickamauga at its mouth. the next day we struck the
rebel rear at chickamauga station, and again near graysville. there
we came in contact with hooker's and palmer's troops, who had
reached ringgold. there i detached howard to cross taylor's ridge,
and strike the railroad which comes from the north by cleveland to
dalton. hooker's troops were roughly handled at ringgold, and the
pursuit was checked. receiving a note from general hooker, asking
help, i rode forward to ringgold to explain the movement of howard;
where i met general grant, and learned that the rebels had again
retreated toward dalton. he gave orders to discontinue the pursuit,
as he meant to turn his attention to general burnside, supposed to
be in great danger at knoxville, about one hundred and thirty miles
northeast. general grant returned and spent part of the night with
me, at graysville. we talked over matters generally, and he
explained that he had ordered general gordon granger, with the
fourth corps, to move forward rapidly to burnsides help, and that
he must return to chattanooga to push him. by reason of the
scarcity of food, especially of forage, he consented that, instead
of going back, i might keep out in the country; for in motion i
could pick up some forage and food, especially on the hiawassee
river, whereas none remained in chattanooga.
accordingly, on the th of november, my several columns marched
to cleveland, and the next day we reached the hiawassee at
charleston, where the chattanooga & knoxville railroad crosses
it. the railroad-bridge was partially damaged by the enemy in
retreating, but we found some abandoned stores. there and
thereabouts i expected some rest for my weary troops and horses;
but, as i rode into town, i met colonel j. h. wilson and c. a. dana
(assistant secretary of war), who had ridden out from chattanooga
to find me, with the following letter from general grant, and
copies of several dispatches from general burnside, the last which
had been received from him by way of cumberland gap:
tennessee, nov. , 
major-general w. t. sherman
news are received from knoxville to the morning of the th. at
that time the place was still invested, but the attack on it was
not vigorous. longstreet evidently determined to starve the
garrison out. granger is on the way to burnside's relief, but i
have lost all faith in his energy or capacity to manage an
expedition of the importance of this one. i am inclined to think,
therefore, i shall have to send you. push as rapidly as you can to
the hiawassee, and determine for yourself what force to take with
you from that point. granger has his corps with him, from which you
will select in conjunction with the force now with you. in plain
words, you will assume command of all the forces now moving up the
tennessee, including the garrison at kingston, and from that force,
organize what you deem proper to relieve burnside. the balance send
back to chattanooga. granger has a boat loaded with provisions,
which you can issue, and return the boat. i will have another
loaded, to follow you. use, of course, as sparingly as possible
from the rations taken with you, and subsist off the country all
you can.
it is expected that foster is moving, by this time, from
cumberland gap on knoxville. i do not know what force he will have
with him, but presume it will range from three thousand five
hundred to five thousand i leave this matter to you, knowing that
you will do better acting upon your discretion than you could
trammeled with instructions. i will only add, that the last advices
from burnside himself indicated his ability to hold out with
rations only to about the d of december. very respectfully,
u. s. grant, major-general commanding,
this showed that, on the th of november, general burnside was
in knoxville, closely besieged by the rebel general longstreet;
that his provisions were short, and that, unless relieved by
december d, he might have to surrender. general grant further
wrote that general granger, instead of moving with great rapidity
as ordered, seemed to move "slowly, and with reluctance;" and,
although he (general grant) hated to call on me and on my tired
troops, there was no alternative. he wanted me to take command of
every thing within reach, and to hurry forward to knoxville.
all the details of our march to knoxville are also given in my
official report. by extraordinary efforts long's small brigade of
cavalry reached knoxville during the night of the d, purposely to
let burnside know that i was rapidly approaching with an adequate
force to raise the siege.
with the head of my infantry column i reached marysville, about
fifteen miles short of knoxville, on the th of december; when i
received official notice from burnside that longstreet had raised
the siege, and had started in retreat up the valley toward
virginia. halting all the army, except granger's two divisions, on
the morning of the th, with general granger and some of my staff i
rode into knoxville. approaching from the south and west, we
crossed the holston on a pontoon bridge, and in a large pen on the
knoxville side i saw a fine lot of cattle, which did not look much
like starvation. i found general burnside and staff domiciled in a
large, fine mansion, looking very comfortable, and in, a few words
he described to me the leading events, of the previous few days,
and said he had already given orders looking to the pursuit of
longstreet. i offered to join in the pursuit, though in fact my men
were worn out, and suffering in that cold season and climate.
indeed, on our way up i personally was almost frozen, and had to
beg leave to sleep in the house of a family at athens.
burnside explained to me that, reenforced by granger's two
divisions of ten thousand men, he would be able to push longstreet
out of east tennessee, and he hoped to capture much of his
artillery and trains. granger was present at our conversation, and
most unreasonably, i thought, remonstrated against being left;
complaining bitterly of what he thought was hard treatment to his
men and himself. i know that his language and manner at that time
produced on my mind a bad impression, and it was one of the causes
which led me to relieve him as a corps commander in the campaign of
the next spring. i asked general burnside to reduce his wishes to
writing, which he did in the letter of december th, embodied in my
official report. general burnside and i then walked along his lines
and examined the salient, known as fort sanders, where, some days
before, longstreet had made his assault, and had sustained a bloody
repulse.
returning to burnside's quarters, we all sat down to a good
dinner, embracing roast-turkey. there was a regular dining table,
with clean tablecloth, dishes, knives, forks, spoons, etc., etc. i
had seen nothing of this kind in my field experience, and could not
help exclaiming that i thought "they were starving," etc.; but
burnside explained that longstreet had at no time completely
invested the place, and that he had kept open communication with
the country on the south side of the river holston, more especially
with the french broad settlements, from whose union inhabitants he
had received a good supply of beef, bacon, and corn meal. had i
known of this, i should not have hurried my men so fast; but until
i reached knoxville i thought his troops there were actually in
danger of starvation. having supplied general burnside all the help
he wanted, we began our leisurely return to chattanooga, which we
reached on the th; when general grant in person ordered me to
restore to general thomas the divisions of howard and davis, which
belonged to his army, and to conduct my own corps (the fifteenth)
to north alabama for winter-quarters.
alabama december , 
brigadier-general john a. rawlins, chief of staff to general grant,
chattanooga.
general: for the first time, i am now at leisure to make an
official record of events with which the troops under my command
have been connected daring the eventful campaign which has just
closed. dating the month of september last, the fifteenth army
corps, which i had the honor to command, lay in camps along the big
black, about twenty miles east of vicksburg, mississippi. it
consisted of four divisions:
the first, commanded by brigadier-general p. j. osterhaus, was
composed of two brigades, led by brigadier-general c. r. woods and
colonel j. a. williamson (of the fourth iowa).
the second, commanded by brigadier-general morgan l. smith, was
composed of two brigades, led by brigadier-generals giles a. smith
and j. a. j. lightburn.
the third, commanded by brigadier-general j. m. tuttle, was
composed of three brigades, led by brigadier-generals j. a. mower
and r. p. buckland, and colonel j. j. wood (of the twelfth
iowa).
the fourth, commanded by brigadier-general hugh ewing, was composed
of three brigades, led by brigadier-general j. m. corse, colonel
loomis (twenty-sixth illinois), and colonel j. r. cockerill (of the
seventieth ohio).
on the d day of september i received a telegraphic dispatch
from general grant, then at vicksburg, commanding the department of
the tennessee, requiring me to detach one of my divisions to march
to vicksburg, there to embark for memphis, where it was to form a
part of an army to be sent to chattanooga, to reenforce general
rosecrans. i designated the first division, and at  a. m. the same
day it marched for vicksburg, and embarked the neat day.
on the d of september i was summoned to vicksburg by the general
commanding, who showed me several dispatches from the
general-in-chief, which led him to suppose he would have to send me
and my whole corps to memphis and eastward, and i was instructed to
prepare for such orders. it was explained to me that, in
consequence of the low stage of water in the mississippi, boats had
arrived irregularly, and had brought dispatches that seemed to
conflict in their meaning, and that general john e. smith's
division (of general mcpherson's corps) had been ordered up to
memphis, and that i should take that division and leave one of my
own in its stead, to hold the line of the big black. i detailed my
third division (general tuttle) to remain and report to
major-general mcpherson, commanding the seventeenth corps, at
vicksburg; and that of general john e. smith, already started for
memphis, was styled the third division, fifteenth corps, though it
still belongs to the seventeenth army corps. this division is also
composed of three brigades, commanded by general matthias, colonel
j. b. raum (of the fifty-sixth illinois), and colonel j. i.
alexander (of the fifty-ninth indiana).
the second and fourth divisions were started for vicksburg the
moment i was notified that boats were in readiness, and on the th
of september i embarked in person in the steamer atlantic, for
memphis, followed by a fleet of boats conveying these two
divisions. our progress was slow, on account of the unprecedentedly
low water in the mississippi, and the scarcity of coal and wood. we
were compelled at places to gather fence-rails, and to land wagons
and haul wood from the interior to the boats; but i reached memphis
during the night of the d of october, and the other boats came in
on the d and th.
on arrival at memphis i saw general hurlbut, and read all the
dispatches and letters of instruction of general halleck, and
therein derived my instructions, which i construed to be as
follows:
to conduct the fifteenth army corps, and all other troops which
could be spared from the line of the memphis & charleston
railroad, to athens, alabama, and thence report by letter for
orders to general rosecrans, commanding the army of the cumberland,
at chattanooga; to follow substantially the railroad eastward,
repairing it as i moved; to look to my own line for supplies; and
in no event to depend on general rosecrans for supplies, as the
roads to his rear were already overtaxed to supply his present
army.
i learned from general hurlbut that general osterhaus's division
was already out in front of corinth, and that general john e. smith
was still at memphis, moving his troops and material by railroad as
fast as its limited stock would carry them. general j. d. webster
was superintendent of the railroad, and was enjoined to work night
and day, and to expedite the movement as rapidly as possible; but
the capacity of the road was so small, that i soon saw that i could
move horses, mules, and wagons faster by land, and therefore i
dispatched the artillery and wagons by the road under escort, and
finally moved the entire fourth division by land.
the enemy seems to have had early notice of this movement, and
he endeavored to thwart us from the start. a considerable force
assembled in a threatening attitude at salem, south of salisbury
station; and general carr, who commanded at corinth, felt compelled
to turn back and use a part of my troops, that had already reached
corinth, to resist the threatened attack.
on sunday, october th, having put in motion my whole force, i
started myself for corinth, in a special train, with the battalion
of the thirteenth united states regulars as escort. we reached
collierville station about noon, just in time to take part in the
defense made of that station by colonel d. c. anthony, of the
sixty-sixth indiana, against an attack made by general chalmers
with a force of about three thousand cavalry, with eight pieces of
artillery. he was beaten off, the damage to the road repaired, and
we resumed our journey the next day, reaching corinth at night.
i immediately ordered general blair forward to iuka, with the
first division, and, as fast as i got troops up, pushed them
forward of bear creek, the bridge of which was completely
destroyed, and an engineer regiment, under command of colonel flag,
was engaged in its repairs.
quite a considerable force of the enemy was assembled in our
front, near tuscumbia, to resist our advance. it was commanded by
general stephen d. lee, and composed of roddy's and ferguson's
brigades, with irregular cavalry, amounting in the aggregate to
about five thousand.
in person i moved from corinth to burnsville on the th, and to
iuka on the th of october.
osterhaus's division was in the advance, constantly skirmishing
with the enemy; he was supported by general morgan l. smith's, both
divisions under the general command of major-general blair. general
john e. smith's division covered the working-party engaged in
rebuilding the railroad.
foreseeing difficulty in crossing the tennessee river, i had
written to admiral porter, at cairo, asking him to watch the
tennessee and send up some gunboats the moment the stage of water
admitted; and had also requested general allen, quartermaster at
st. louis, to dispatch to eastport a steam ferry-boat.
the admiral, ever prompt and ready to assist us, had two fine
gunboats at eastport, under captain phelps, the very day after my
arrival at iuka; and captain phelps had a coal-barge decked over,
with which to cross our horses and wagons before the arrival of the
ferry-boat.
still following literally the instructions of general halleck, i
pushed forward the repairs of the railroad, and ordered general
blair, with the two leading divisions, to drive the enemy beyond
tuscumbia. this he did successfully, after a pretty severe fight at
cane creek, occupying tuscumbia on the th of october.
in the meantime many important changes in command had occurred,
which i must note here, to a proper understanding of the case.
general grant had been called from vicksburg, and sent to
chattanooga to command the military division of the mississippi,
composed of the three departments of the ohio, cumberland, and
tennessee; and the department of the tennessee had been devolved on
me, with instructions, however, to retain command of the army in
the field. at iuka i made what appeared to me the best disposition
of matters relating to the department, giving general mcpherson
full powers in mississippi and general hurlbut in west tennessee,
and assigned general blair to the command of the fifteenth army
corps; and summoned general hurlbut from memphis, and general dodge
from corinth, and selected out of the sixteenth corps a force of
about eight thousand men, which i directed general dodge to
organize with all expedition, and with it to follow me
eastward.
on the th of october, when general blair, with two divisions,
was at tuscumbia, i ordered general ewing, with the fourth
division, to cross the tennessee (by means of the gunboats and
scow) as rapidly as possible at eastport, and push forward to
florence, which he did; and the same day a messenger from general
grant floated down the tennessee over muscle shoals, landed at
tuscumbia, and was sent to me at iuka. he bore a short message from
the general to this effect: "drop all work on the railroad east of
bear creek; push your command toward bridgeport till you meet
orders;" etc. instantly the order was executed; the order of march
was reversed, and all the columns were directed to eastport, the
only place where we could cross the tennessee. at first we only had
the gunboats and coal-barge; but the ferry-boat and two transports
arrived on the st of october, and the work of crossing was pushed
with all the vigor possible. in person i crossed, and passed to the
head of the column at florence on the st of november, leaving the
rear divisions to be conducted by general blair, and marched to
rogersville and elk river. this was found impassable. to ferry
would have consumed to much time, and to build a bridge still more;
so there was no alternative but to turn up elk river by way of
gilbertsboro, elkton, etc., to the stone bridge at fayetteville,
where we crossed the elk, and proceeded to winchester and
deckerd.
at fayetteville i received orders from general grant to come to
bridgeport with the fifteenth army corps, and to leave general
dodge's command at pulaski, and along the railroad from columbia to
decatur. i instructed general blair to follow with the second and
first divisions by way of new market, larkinsville, and bellefonte,
while i conducted the other two divisions by way of deckerd; the
fourth division crossing the mountain to stevenson, and the third
by university place and sweden's cove.
in person i proceeded by sweden's cove and battle creek,
reaching bridgeport on the night of november th. i immediately
telegraphed to the commanding general my arrival, and the positions
of my several divisions, and was summoned to chattanooga. i took
the first steamboat daring the night of the th for belly's ferry,
and rode into chattanooga on the th. i then learned the part
assigned me in the coming drama, was supplied with the necessary
maps and information, and rode, during the th, in company with
generals grant, thomas, w. f. smith, brannan, and others, to the
positions occupied on the west bank of the tennessee, from which
could be seen the camps of the enemy, compassing chattanooga and
the line of missionary hills, with its terminus on chickamauga
creek, the point that i was expected to take, hold, and fortify.
pontoons, with a full supply of balks and chesses, had been
prepared for the bridge over the tennessee, and all things had been
prearranged with a foresight that elicited my admiration. from the
hills we looked down on the amphitheatre of chattanooga as on a
map, and nothing remained but for me to put my troops in the
desired position. the plan contemplated that, in addition to
crossing the tennessee river and making a lodgment on the terminus
of missionary ridge, i should demonstrate against lookout mountain,
near trenton, with a part of my command.
all in chattanooga were impatient for action, rendered almost
acute by the natural apprehensions felt for the safety of general
burnside in east tennessee.
my command had marched from memphis, three hundred and thirty
miles, and i had pushed them as fast as the roads and distance
would admit, but i saw enough of the condition of men and animals
in chattanooga to inspire me with renewed energy. i immediately
ordered my leading division (general ewing's) to march via
shellmound to trenton, demonstrating against lookout ridge, but to
be prepared to turn quickly and follow me to chattanooga and in
person i returned to bridgeport, rowing a boat down the tennessee
from belly's ferry, and immediately on arrival put in motion my
divisions in the order in which they had arrived. the bridge of
boats at bridgeport was frail, and, though used day and night, our
passage was slow; and the road thence to chattanooga was dreadfully
cut up and encumbered with the wagons of the other troops stationed
along the road. i reached general hooker's headquarters during a
rain, in the afternoon of the th, and met general grant's orders
for the general attack on the next day. it was simply impossible
for me to fulfill my part in time; only one division (general john
e. smith's) was in position. general ewing was still at trenton,
and the other two were toiling along the terrible road from
shellmound to chattanooga. no troops ever were or could be in
better condition than mine, or who labored harder to fulfill their
part. on a proper representation, general grant postponed the
attack. on the st i got the second division over brown's-ferry
bridge, and general ewing got up; but the bridge broke repeatedly,
and delays occurred which no human sagacity could prevent. all
labored night and day, and general ewing got over on the d; but
my rear division was cut off by the broken bridge at brown's ferry,
and could not join me. i offered to go into action with my three
divisions, supported by general jeff. c. davis, leaving one of my
best divisions (osterhaus's) to act with general hooker against
lookout mountain. that division has not joined me yet, but i know
and feel that it has served the country well, and that it has
reflected honor on the fifteenth army corps and the army of the
tennessee. i leave the record of its history to general hooker, or
whomsoever has had its services during the late memorable events,
confident that all will do it merited honor.
at last, on the d of november, my three divisions lay behind
the hills opposite the mouth of the chickamauga. i dispatched the
brigade of the second division, commanded by general giles a.
smith, under cover of the hills, to north chickamauga creek, to man
the boats designed for the pontoon-bridge, with orders (at
midnight) to drop down silently to a point above the mouth of the
south chickamauga, there land two regiments, who were to move along
the river-bank quietly, and capture the enemy's river-pickets.
general giles a. smith then was to drop rapidly below the month
of the chickamauga, disembark the rest of his brigade, and dispatch
the boats across for fresh loads. these orders were skillfully
executed, and every rebel picket but one was captured. the balance
of general morgan l. smith's division was then rapidly ferried
across; that of general john e. smith followed, and by daylight of
november th two divisions of about eight thousand men were on the
east bank of the tennessee, and had thrown up a very respectable
rifle-trench as a tete du pont. as soon as the day dawned, some of
the boats were taken from the use of ferrying, and a pontoon-bridge
was begun, under the immediate direction of captain dresser, the
whole planned and supervised by general william f. smith in person.
a pontoon-bridge was also built at the same time over chickamanga
creek, near its mouth, giving communication with the two regiments
which had been left on the north side, and fulfilling a most
important purpose at a later stage of the drama. i will here bear
my willing testimony to the completeness of this whole business.
all the officers charged with the work were present, and manifested
a skill which i cannot praise too highly. i have never beheld any
work done so quietly, so well; and i doubt if the history of war
can show a bridge of that extent (viz., thirteen hundred and fifty
feet) laid so noiselessly and well, in so short a time. i attribute
it to the genius and intelligence of general william f. smith. the
steamer dunbar arrived up in the course of the morning, and
relieved ewing's division of the labor of rowing across; but by
noon the pontoon-bridge was done, and my three divisions were
across, with men, horses, artillery, and every thing.
general jeff. c. davis's division was ready to take the bridge,
and i ordered the columns to form in order to carry the missionary
hills. the movement had been carefully explained to all division
commanders, and at  p.m. we marched from the river in three
columns in echelon: the left, general morgan l. smith, the column
of direction, following substantially chickamauga creek; the
centre, general, john e. smith, in columns, doubled on the centre,
at one brigade interval to the right and rear; the right, general
ewing, in column at the same distance to the right rear, prepared
to deploy to the right, on the supposition that we would meet an
enemy in that direction. each head of column was covered by a good
line of skirmishers, with supports. a light drizzling rain
prevailed, and the clouds hung low, cloaking our movement from the
enemy's tower of observation on lookout mountain. we soon gained
the foothills; our skirmishers crept up the face of the hills,
followed by their supports, and at . p.m. we had gained, with no
loss, the desired point. a brigade of each division was pushed
rapidly to the top of the hill, and the enemy for the first time
seemed to realize the movement, but too late, for we were in
possession. he opened with artillery, but general ewing soon got
some of captain richardson's guns up that steep hill and gave back
artillery, and the enemy's skirmishers made one or two ineffectual
dashes at general lightburn, who had swept round and got a farther
hill, which was the real continuation of the ridge. from studying
all the maps, i had inferred that missionary ridge was a continuous
hill; but we found ourselves on two high points, with a deep
depression between us and the one immediately over the tunnel,
which was my chief objective point. the ground we had gained,
however, was so important, that i could leave nothing to chance,
and ordered it to be fortified during the night. one brigade of
each division was left on the hill, one of general morgan l.
smith's closed the gap to chickamauga creek, two of general john e.
smith's were drawn back to the base in reserve, and general ewing's
right was extended down into the plain, thus crossing the ridge in
a general line, facing southeast.
the enemy felt our left flank about  p.m., and a pretty smart
engagement with artillery and muskets ensued, when he drew off; but
it cost us dear, for general giles a. smith was severely wounded,
and had to go to the rear; and the command of the brigade devolved
on colonel topper (one hundred and sixteenth illinois), who managed
it with skill during the rest of the operations. at the moment of
my crossing the bridge, general howard appeared, having come with
three regiments from chattanooga, along the east bank of the
tennessee, connecting my new position with that of the main army in
chattanooga. he left the three regiments attached temporarily to
gen. ewing's right, and returned to his own corps at chattanooga.
as night closed in, i ordered general jeff. c. davis to keep one of
his brigades at the bridge, one close up to my position, and one
intermediate. thus we passed the night, heavy details being kept
busy at work on the intrenchments on the hill. during the night the
sky cleared away bright, a cold frost filled the air, and our
camp-fires revealed to the enemy and to our friends in chattanooga
our position on missionary ridge. about midnight i received, at the
hands of major rowley (of general grant's staff), orders to attack
the enemy at "dawn of day," with notice that general thomas would
attack in force early in the day. accordingly, before day i was in
the saddle, attended by all my staff; rode to the extreme left of
our position near chickamauga creek; thence up the hill, held by
general lightburn; and round to the extreme right of general
ewing.
catching as accurate an idea of the ground as possible by the
dim light of morning, i saw that our line of attack was in the
direction of missionary ridge, with wings supporting on either
flank. quite a valley lay between us and the next hill of the
series, and this hill presented steep sides, the one to the west
partially cleared, but the other covered with the native forest.
the crest of the ridge was narrow and wooded. the farther point of
this hill was held-by the enemy with a breastwork of logs and fresh
earth, filled with men and two guns. the enemy was also seen in
great force on a still higher hill beyond the tunnel, from which he
had a fine plunging fire on the hill in dispute. the gorge between,
through which several roads and the railroad-tunnel pass, could not
be seen from our position, but formed the natural place d'armes,
where the enemy covered his masses to resist our contemplated
movement of turning his right flank and endangering his
communications with his depot at chickamauga station.
as soon as possible, the following dispositions were made: the
brigades of colonels cockrell and alexander, and general lightburn,
were to hold our hill as the key-point. general corse, with as much
of his brigade as could operate along the narrow ridge, was to
attack from our right centre. general lightburn was to dispatch a
good regiment from his position to cooperate with general corse;
and general morgan l. smith was to move along the east base of
missionary ridge, connecting with general corse; and colonel
loomis, in like manner, to move along the west bank, supported by
the two reserve brigades of general john e. smith.
the sun had hardly risen before general corse had completed his
preparations and his bugle sounded the "forward!" the fortieth
illinois, supported by the forty-sixth ohio, on our right centre,
with the thirtieth ohio (colonel jones), moved down the face of our
hill, and up that held by the enemy. the line advanced to within
about eighty yards of the intrenched position, where general corse
found a secondary crest, which he gained and held. to this point he
called his reserves, and asked for reenforcements, which were sent;
but the space was narrow, and it was not well to crowd the men, as
the enemy's artillery and musketry fire swept the approach to his
position, giving him great advantage. as soon as general corse had
made his preparations, he assaulted, and a close, severe contest
ensued, which lasted more than an hour, gaining and losing ground,
but never the position first obtained, from which the enemy in vain
attempted to drive him. general morgan l. smith kept gaining ground
on the left spurs of missionary ridge, and colonel loomis got
abreast of the tunnel and railroad embankment on his aide, drawing
the enemy's fire, and to that extent relieving the assaulting party
on the hill-crest. captain callender had four of his guns on
general ewing's hill, and captain woods his napoleon battery on
general lightburn's; also, two guns of dillon's battery were with
colonel alexander's brigade. all directed their fire as carefully
as possible, to clear the hill to our front, without endangering
our own men. the fight raged furiously about  a.m., when general
corse received a severe wound, was brought off the field, and the
command of the brigade and of the assault at that key-point
devolved on that fine young, gallant officer, colonel walcutt, of
the forty-sixth ohio, who fulfilled his part manfully. he continued
the contest, pressing forward at all points. colonel loomis had
made good progress to the right, and about  p.m., general john e.
smith, judging the battle to be most severe on the hill, and being
required to support general ewing, ordered up colonel raum's and
general matthias's brigades across the field to the summit that was
being fought for. they moved up under a heavy fire of cannon and
musketry, and joined colonel walcutt; but the crest was so narrow
that they necessarily occupied the west face of the hill. the
enemy, at the time being massed in great strength in the
tunnel-gorge, moved a large force under cover of the ground and the
thick bushes, and suddenly appeared on the right rear of this
command. the suddenness of the attack disconcerted the men, exposed
as they were in the open field; they fell back in some disorder to
the lower edge of the field, and reformed. these two brigades were
in the nature of supports, and did not constitute a part of the
real attack.
the movement, seen from chattanooga (five miles off ) with
spy-glasses, gave rise to the report, which even general meiga has
repeated, that we were repulsed on the left. it was not so. the
real attacking columns of general corse, colonel loomis, and
general smith, were not repulsed. they engaged in a close struggle
all day persistently, stubbornly, and well. when the two reserve
brigades of general john e. smith fell back as described, the enemy
made a show of pursuit, but were in their turn caught in flank by
the well-directed fire of our brigade on the wooded crest, and
hastily sought cover behind the hill. thus matters stood about 
p.m. the day was bright and clear, and the amphitheatre of
chattanooga sat in beauty at our feet. i had watched for the attack
of general thomas "early in the day." column after column of the
enemy was streaming toward me; gun after gun poured its concentric
shot on us, from every hill and spur that gave a view of any part
of the ground held by us. an occasional shot from fort wood and
orchard knob, and some musketry-fire and artillery over about
lookout mountain, was all that i could detect on our side; but
about  p.m. i noticed the white line of musketry-fire in front of
orchard knoll extending farther and farther right and left and on.
we could only hear a faint echo of sound, but enough was seen to
satisfy me that general thomas was at last moving on the centre. i
knew that our attack had drawn vast masses of the enemy to our
flank, and felt sure of the result. some guns which had been firing
on us all day were silent, or were turned in a different
direction.
the advancing line of musketry-fire from orchard knoll
disappeared to us behind a spar of the hill, and could no longer be
seen; and it was not until night closed in that i knew that the
troops in chattanooga had swept across missionary ridge and broken
the enemy's centre. of course, the victory was won, and pursuit was
the next step.
i ordered general morgan l. smith to feel to the tunnel, and it
was found vacant, save by the dead and wounded of our own and the
enemy commingled. the reserve of general jeff. c. davis was ordered
to march at once by the pontoon-bridge across chickamauga creek, at
its mouth, and push forward for the depot.
general howard had reported to me in the early part of the day,
with the remainder of his army corps (the eleventh), and had been
posted to connect my left with chickamauga creek. he was ordered to
repair an old broken bridge about two miles up the chickamauga, and
to follow general davis at  a.m., and the fifteenth army corps was
ordered to follow at daylight. but general howard found that to
repair the bridge was more of a task than was at first supposed,
and we were all compelled to cross the chickamauga on the new
pontoon-bridge at its mouth. by about  a.m. general jeff. c.
davis's division reached the depot, just in time to see it in
flames. he found the enemy occupying two hills, partially
intrenched, just beyond the depot. these he soon drove away. the
depot presented a scene of desolation that war alone
exhibits—corn-meal and corn in huge burning piles, broken
wagons, abandoned caissons, two thirty-two-pounder rifled-guns with
carriages burned, pieces of pontoons, balks and chesses, etc.,
destined doubtless for the famous invasion of kentucky, and all
manner of things, burning and broken. still, the enemy kindly left
us a good supply of forage for our horses, and meal, beans, etc.,
for our men.
pausing but a short while, we passed on, the road filled with
broken wagons and abandoned caissons, till night. just as the head
of the column emerged from a dark, miry swamp, we encountered the
rear-guard of the retreating enemy. the fight was sharp, but the
night closed in so dark that we could not move. general grant came
up to us there. at daylight we resumed the march, and at
graysville, where a good bridge spanned the chickamauga, we found
the corps of general palmer on the south bank, who informed us that
general hooker was on a road still farther south, and we could hear
his guns near ringgold.
as the roads were filled with all the troops they could possibly
accommodate, i turned to the east, to fulfill another part of the
general plan, viz., to break up all communication between bragg and
longstreet.
we had all sorts of rumors as to the latter, but it was manifest
that we should interpose a proper force between these two armies. i
therefore directed general howard to move to parker's gap, and
thence send rapidly a competent force to red clay, or the
council-ground, there to destroy a large section of the railroad
which connects dalton and cleveland. this work was most
successfully and fully accomplished that day. the division of
general jeff. c. davis was moved close up to ringgold, to assist
general hooker if needed, and the fifteenth corps was held at
grayeville, for any thing that might turn up. about noon i had a
message from general hooker, saying he had had a pretty hard fight
at the mountain-pass just beyond ringgold, and he wanted me to come
forward to turn the position. he was not aware at the time that
howard, by moving through parker's gap toward red clay, had already
turned it. so i rode forward to ringgold in person, and found the
enemy had already fallen back to tunnel hill. he was already out of
the valley of the chickamauga, and on ground whence the waters flow
to the coosa. he was out of tennessee.
i found general grant at ringgold, and, after some explanations
as to breaking up the railroad from ringgold back to the state
line, as soon as some cars loaded with wounded men could be pushed
back to chickamauga depot, i was ordered to move slowly and
leisurely back to chattanooga.
on the following day the fifteenth corps destroyed absolutely
and effectually the railroad from a point half-way between ringgold
and graysville, back to the state line; and general grant, coming
to graysville, consented that, instead of returning direct to
chattanooga, i might send back all my artillery-wagons and
impediments, and make a circuit by the north as far as the
hiawasaee river.
accordingly, on the morning of november th, general howard
moved from parker's gap to cleveland, general davis by way of
mcdaniel's gap, and general blair with two divisions of the
fifteenth corps by way of julien's gap, all meeting at cleveland
that night. here another good break was made in the dalton &
cleveland road. on the th the army moved to charleston, general
howard approaching so rapidly that the enemy evacuated with haste,
leaving the bridge but partially damaged, and five car-loads of
flour and provisions on the north bank of the hiawassee.
this was to have been the limit of our operations. officers and
men had brought no baggage or provisions, and the weather was
bitter cold. i had already reached the town of charleston, when
general wilson arrived with a letter from general grant, at
chattanooga, informing me that the latest authentic accounts from
knoxville were to the th, at which time general burnside was
completely invested, and had provisions only to include the d of
december; that general granger had left chattanooga for knoxville,
by the river-road, with a steamboat following him in the river; but
he feared that general granger could not reach knoxville in time,
and ordered me to take command of all troops moving for the relief
of knoxville, and hasten to general burnside. seven days before, we
had left our camps on the other side of the tennessee with two
days' rations, without a change of clothing—stripped for the
fight, with but a single blanket or coat per man, from myself to
the private included.
of course, we then had no provisions save what we gathered by
the road, and were ill supplied for such a march. but we learned
that twelve thousand of our fellow-soldiers were beleaguered in the
mountain town of knoxville, eighty-four miles distant; that they
needed relief, and must have it in three days. this was
enough—and it had to be done. general howard that night
repaired and planked the railroad-bridge, and at daylight the army
passed over the hiawassee and marched to athens, fifteen miles. i
had supposed rightly that general granger was about the mouth of
the hiawassee, and had sent him notice of my orders; that general
grant had sent me a copy of his written instructions, which were
full and complete, and that he must push for kingston, near which
we would make a junction. but by the time i reached athens i had
better studied the geography, and sent him orders, which found him
at decatur, that kingston was out of our way; that he should send
his boat to kingston, but with his command strike across to
philadelphia, and report to me there. i had but a small force of
cavalry, which was, at the time of my receipt of general grant's
orders, scouting over about benton and columbus. i left my aide,
major mccoy, at charleston, to communicate with this cavalry and
hurry it forward. it overtook me in the night at athens.
on the d of december the army moved rapidly north toward
loudon, twenty-six miles distant. about  a.m., the cavalry passed
to the head of the column, was ordered to push to london, and, if
possible, to save a pontoon-bridge across the tennessee, held by a
brigade of the enemy commanded by general vaughn. the cavalry moved
with such rapidity as to capture every picket; but the brigade of
vaughn had artillery in position, covered by earthworks, and
displayed a force too respectable to be carried by a cavalry dash,
so that darkness closed in before general howard's infantry got up.
the enemy abandoned the place in the night, destroying the
pontoons, running three locomotives and forty-eight cars into the
tennessee river, and abandoned much provision, four guns, and other
material, which general howard took at daylight. but the bridge was
gone, and we were forced to turn east and trust to general
burnside's bridge at knoxville. it was all-important that general
burnside should have notice of our coming, and but one day of the
time remained.
accordingly, at philadelphia, during the night of the d of
december, i sent my aide (major audenried) forward to colonel long,
commanding the brigade of cavalry at london, to explain to him how
all-important it was that notice of our approach should reach
general burnside within twenty-four hours, ordering him to select
the best materials of his command, to start at once, ford the
little tennessee, and push into knoxville at whatever cost of life
and horse-flesh. major audenried was ordered to go along. the
distance to be traveled was about forty miles, and the roads
villainous. before day they were off, and at daylight the fifteenth
corps was turned from philadelphia for the little tennessee at
morgantown, where my maps represented the river as being very
shallow; but it was found too deep for fording, and the water was
freezing cold—width two hundred and forty yards, depth from
two to five feet; horses could ford, but artillery and men could
not. a bridge was indispensable. general wilson (who accompanied
me) undertook to superintend the bridge, and i am under many
obligations to him, as i was without an engineer, having sent
captain jenny back from graysville to survey our field of battle.
we had our pioneers, but only such tools as axes, picks, and
spades. general wilson, working partly with cut wood and partly
with square trestles (made of the houses of the late town of
morgantown), progressed apace, and by dark of december th troops
and animals passed over the bridge, and by daybreak of the th the
fifteenth corps (general blair's) was over, and generals-granger's
and davis's divisions were ready to pass; but the diagonal bracing
was imperfect for, want of spikes, and the bridge broke, causing
delay. i had ordered general blair to move out on the marysville
road five miles, there to await notice that general granger was on
a parallel road abreast of him, and in person i was at a house
where the roads parted, when a messenger rode up, bringing me a few
words from general burnside, to the effect that colonel long had
arrived at knoxville with his cavalry, and that all was well with
him there; longstreet still lay before the place, but there were
symptoms of his speedy departure.
i felt that i had accomplished the first great step in the
problem for the relief of general burnside's army, but still urged
on the work. as soon as the bridge was mended, all the troops moved
forward. general howard had marched from loudon, had found a pretty
good ford for his horses and wagons at davis's, seven miles below
morgantown, and had made an ingenious bridge of the wagons left by
general vaughn at london, on which to pass his men. he marched by
unitia and louisville. on the night of the th all the heads of
columns communicated at marysville, where i met major van buren (of
general burnside's staff), who announced that longstreet had the
night before retreated on the rutledge, rogersville, and bristol
road, leading to virginia; that general burnside's cavalry was on
his heels; and that the general desired to see me in person as soon
as i could come to knoxville. i ordered all the troops to halt and
rest, except the two divisions of general granger, which were
ordered to move forward to little river, and general granger to
report in person to general burnside for orders. his was the force
originally designed to reenforce general burnside, and it was
eminently proper that it should join in the stern-chase after
longstreet.
on the morning of december th i rode from marysville into
knoxville, and met general burnside. general granger arrived later
in the day. we examined his lines of fortifications, which were a
wonderful production for the short time allowed in their selection
of ground and construction of work. it seemed to me that they were
nearly impregnable. we examined the redoubt named "sanders," where,
on the sunday previous, three brigades of the enemy had assaulted
and met a bloody repulse. now, all was peaceful and quiet; but a
few hours before, the deadly bullet sought its victim all round
about that hilly barrier.
the general explained to me fully and frankly what he had done,
and what he proposed to do. he asked of me nothing but general
granger's command; and suggested, in view of the large force i had
brought from chattanooga, that i should return with due expedition
to the line of the hiawasaee, lest bragg, reenforced, might take
advantage of our absence to resume the offensive. i asked him to
reduce this to writing, which he did, and i here introduce it as
part of my report:
headquarters of the ohio knoxville, december , 
major-general w. t. sherman, commanding, etc.
general: i desire to express to you and your command my most hearty
thanks and gratitude for your promptness in coming to our relief
during the siege of knoxville, and i am satisfied your approach
served to raise the siege. the emergency having passed, i do not
deem, for the present, any other portion of your command but the
corps of general granger necessary for operations in this section;
and, inasmuch as general grant has weakened the forces immediately
with him in order to relieve us (thereby rendering the position of
general thomas less secure), i deem it advisable that all the
troops now here, save those commanded by general granger, should
return at once to within supporting distance of the forces in front
of bragg's army. in behalf of my command, i desire again to thank
you and your command for the kindness you have done us.
i am, general, very respectfully, your obedient servant,
a. e. burnside, major-general commanding.
accordingly, having seen general burnside's forces move out of
knoxville in pursuit of longstreet, and general granger's move in,
i put in motion my own command to return. general howard was
ordered to move, via davis's ford and sweetwater, to athena, with a
guard forward at charleston, to hold and repair the bridge which
the enemy had retaken after our passage up. general jeff. c. davis
moved to columbus, on the hiawaesee, via madisonville, and the two
divisions of the fifteenth corps moved to tellico plains, to cover
movement of cavalry across the mountains into georgia, to overtake
a wagon-train which had dodged us on our way up, and had escaped by
way of murphy. subsequently, on a report from general howard that
the enemy held charleston, i diverted general ewing's division to
athena, and went in person to tellico with general morgan l.
smith's division. by the th all our troops were in position, and
we held the rich country between the little tennessee and the
hiawasaee. the cavalry, under colonel long, passed the mountain at
tellico, and proceeded about seventeen miles beyond murphy, when
colonel long, deeming his farther pursuit of the wagon-train
useless, returned on the th to tellico. i then ordered him and
the division of general morgan l. smith to move to charleston, to
which point i had previously ordered the corps of general
howard.
on the th of december all of my command in the field lay along
the hiawassee. having communicated to general grant the actual
state of affairs, i received orders to leave, on the line of the
hiawassee, all the cavalry, and come to chattanooga with the rest
of my command. i left the brigade of cavalry commanded by colonel
long, reenforced by the fifth ohio cavalry (lieutenant-colonel
heath)—the only cavalry properly belonging to the fifteenth
army corps—at charleston, and with the remainder moved by
easy marches, by cleveland and tyner's depot, into chattanooga,
where i received in person from general grant orders to transfer
back to their appropriate commands the corps of general howard and
the division commanded by general jeff. c. davis, and to conduct
the fifteenth army corps to its new field of operations.
it will thus appear that we have been constantly in motion since
our departure from the big black, in mississippi, until the present
moment. i have been unable to receive from subordinate commanders
the usual full, detailed reports of events, and have therefore been
compelled to make up this report from my own personal memory; but,
as soon as possible, subordinate reports will be received and duly
forwarded.
in reviewing the facts, i must do justice to the men of my command
for the patience, cheerfulness, and courage which officers and men
have displayed throughout, in battle, on the march, and in camp.
for long periods, without regular rations or supplies of any kind,
they have marched through mud and over rocks, sometimes barefooted,
without a murmur. without a moment's rest after a march of over
four hundred miles, without sleep for three successive nights, we
crossed the tennessee, fought our part of the battle of
chattanooga, pursued the enemy out of tennessee, and then turned
more than a hundred and twenty miles north and compelled longstreet
to raise the siege of knoxville, which gave so much anxiety to the
whole country. it is hard to realize the importance of these events
without recalling the memory of the general feeling which pervaded
all minds at chattanooga prior to our arrival. i cannot speak of
the fifteenth army corps without a seeming vanity; but as i am no
longer its commander, i assert that there is no better body of
soldiers in america than it. i wish all to feel a just pride in its
real honors.
to general howard and his command, to general jeff. c. davis and
his, i am more than usually indebted for the intelligence of
commanders and fidelity of commands. the brigade of colonel
bushbeck, belonging to the eleventh corps, which was the first to
come out of chattanooga to my flank, fought at the tunnel hill, in
connection with general ewing's division, and displayed a courage
almost amounting to rashness. following the enemy almost to the
tunnel-gorge, it lost many valuable lives, prominent among them
lieutenant-colonel taft, spoken of as a most gallant soldier.
in general howard throughout i found a polished and christian
gentleman, exhibiting the highest and most chivalric traits of the
soldier. general davis handled his division with artistic skill,
more especially at the moment we encountered the enemy's
rear-guard, near graysville, at nightfall. i must award to this
division the credit of the best order during our movement through
east tennessee, when long marches and the necessity of foraging to
the right and left gave some reason for disordered ranks:
inasmuch as exception may be taken to my explanation of the
temporary confusion, during the battle of chattanooga, of the two
brigades of general matthias and colonel raum, i will here state
that i saw the whole; and attach no blame to any one. accidents
will happen in battle, as elsewhere; and at the point where they so
manfully went to relieve the pressure on other parts of our
assaulting line, they exposed themselves unconsciously to an enemy
vastly superior in force, and favored by the shape of the ground.
had that enemy come out on equal terms, those brigades would have
shown their mettle, which has been tried more than once before and
stood the test of fire. they reformed their ranks, and were ready
to support general ewing's division in a very few minutes; and the
circumstance would have hardly called for notice on my part, had
not others reported what was seen from chattanooga, a distance of
nearly five miles, from where could only be seen the troops in the
open field in which this affair occurred.
i now subjoin the best report of casualties i am able to compile
from the records thus far received:
killed; wounded; and missing............... 
no report from general davis's division, but loss is small.
among the killed were some of our most valuable officers: colonels
putnam, ninety-third illinois; o'meara, ninetieth illinois; and
torrence, thirtieth iowa; lieutenant-colonel-taft, of the eleventh
corps; and major bushnell, thirteenth illinois.
among the wounded are brigadier-generals giles a. smith, corse, and
matthias; colonel raum; colonel waugelin, twelfth missouri;
lieutenant-colonel partridge, thirteenth illinois; major p. i.
welsh, fifty-sixth illinois; and major nathan mcalla, tenth
iowa.
among the missing is lieutenant-colonel archer, seventeenth
iowa.
my report is already so long, that i must forbear mentioning acts
of individual merit. these will be recorded in the reports of
division commanders, which i will cheerfully indorse; but i must
say that it is but justice that colonels of regiments, who have so
long and so well commanded brigades, as in the following cases,
should be commissioned to the grade which they have filled with so
much usefulness and credit to the public service, viz.: colonel j.
r. cockerell, seventieth, ohio; colonel j. m. loomis, twenty-sixth
illinois; colonel c. c. walcutt, forty-sixth ohio; colonel j. a.
williamson, fourth iowa; colonel g. b. raum, fifty-sixth illinois;
colonel j. i. alexander, fifty-ninth indiana.
my personal staff, as usual, have served their country with
fidelity, and credit to themselves, throughout these events, and
have received my personal thanks.
inclosed you will please find a map of that part of the
battle-field of chattanooga fought over by the troops under my
command, surveyed and drawn by captain jenney, engineer on my
staff. i have the honor to be, your obedient servant,
w. t. sherman, major-general commanding.
[general order no. .]
war department adjutant-general's office washington, february ,
joint resolution tendering the thanks of congress to major-general
w. t. sherman and others.
be it resolved by the senate and house of representatives of the
united states of america in congress assembled, that the thanks of
congress and of the people of the united states are due, and that
the same are hereby tendered, to major-general w. t. sherman,
commander of the department and army of the tennessee, and the
officers and soldiers who served under him, for their gallant and
arduous services in marching to the relief of the army of the
cumberland, and for their gallantry and heroism in the battle of
chattanooga, which contributed in a great degree to the success of
our arms in that glorious victory.
approved february , . by order of the secretary of war:
e. d. townsend, assistant adjutant-general.
on the th of december i was at bridgeport, and gave all the
orders necessary for the distribution of the four divisions of the
fifteenth corps along the railroad from stevenson to decatur, and
the part of the sixteenth corps; commanded by general dodge, along
the railroad from decatur to nashville, to make the needed repairs,
and to be in readiness for the campaign of the succeeding year; and
on the st i went up to nashville, to confer with general grant
and conclude the arrangements for the winter. at that time general
grant was under the impression that the next campaign would be up
the valley of east tennessee, in the direction of virginia; and as
it was likely to be the last and most important campaign of the
war, it became necessary to set free as many of the old troops
serving along the mississippi river as possible. this was the real
object and purpose of the meridian campaign, and of banks's
expedition up red river to shreveport during that winter.
the winter of -' opened very cold and severe; and it was
manifest after the battle of chattanooga, november , , and
the raising of the siege of knoxville, december th, that military
operations in that quarter must in a measure cease, or be limited
to burnside's force beyond knoxville. on the st of december
general grant had removed his headquarters to nashville, tennessee,
leaving general george h. thomas at chattanooga, in command of the
department of the cumberland, and of the army round about that
place; and i was at bridgeport, with orders to distribute my troops
along the railroad from stevenson to decatur, alabama, and from
decatur up toward nashville.
general g. m. dodge, who was in command of the detachment of the
sixteenth corps, numbering about eight thousand men, had not
participated with us in the battle of chattanooga, but had remained
at and near pulaski, tennessee, engaged in repairing that railroad,
as auxiliary to the main line which led from nashville to
stevenson, and chattanooga. general john a. logan had succeeded to
the command of the fifteenth corps, by regular appointment of the
president of the united states, and had relieved general frank p.
blair, who had been temporarily in command of that corps during the
chattanooga and knoxville movement.
at that time i was in command of the department of the
tennessee, which embraced substantially the territory on the east
bank of the mississippi river, from natchez up to the ohio river,
and thence along the tennessee river as high as decatur and
bellefonte, alabama. general mcpherson was at vicksburg and general
hurlbut at memphis, and from them i had the regular reports of
affairs in that quarter of my command. the rebels still maintained
a considerable force of infantry and cavalry in the state of
mississippi, threatening the river, whose navigation had become to
us so delicate and important a matter. satisfied that i could check
this by one or two quick moves inland, and thereby set free a
considerable body of men held as local garrisons, i went up to
nashville and represented the case to general grant, who consented
that i might go down the mississippi river, where the bulk of my
command lay, and strike a blow on the east of the river, while
general banks from new orleans should in like manner strike another
to the west; thus preventing any further molestation of the boats
navigating the main river, and thereby widening the gap in the
southern confederacy.
after having given all the necessary orders for the
distribution, during the winter months, of that part of my command
which was in southern and middle tennessee, i went to cincinnati
and lancaster, ohio, to spend christmas with my family; and on my
return i took minnie with me down to a convent at reading, near
cincinnati, where i left her, and took the cars for cairo,
illinois, which i reached january d, a very cold and bitter day.
the ice was forming fast, and there was great danger that the
mississippi river, would become closed to navigation. admiral
porter, who was at cairo, gave me a small gunboat (the juliet),
with which i went up to paducah, to inspect that place, garrisoned
by a small force; commanded by colonel s. g. hicks, fortieth
illinois, who had been with me and was severely wounded at shiloh.
returning to cairo, we started down the mississippi river, which
was full of floating ice. with the utmost difficulty we made our
way through it, for hours floating in the midst of immense cakes,
that chafed and ground our boat so that at times we were in danger
of sinking. but about the th of january we reached memphis, where
i found general hurlbut, and explained to him my purpose to collect
from his garrisons and those of mcpherson about twenty thousand
men, with which in february to march out from vicksburg as far as
meridian, break up the mobile & ohio railroad, and also the one
leading from vicksburg to selma, alabama. i instructed him to
select two good divisions, and to be ready with them to go along.
at memphis i found brigadier-general w. sooy smith, with a force of
about twenty-five hundred cavalry, which he had by general grant's
orders brought across from middle tennessee, to assist in our
general purpose, as well as to punish the rebel general forrest,
who had been most active in harassing our garrisons in west
tennessee and mississippi. after staying a couple of days at
memphis, we continued on in the gunboat silver cloud to vicksburg,
where i found general mcpherson, and, giving him similar orders,
instructed him to send out spies to ascertain and bring back timely
information of the strength and location of the enemy. the winter
continued so severe that the river at vicksburg was full of
floating ice, but in the silver cloud we breasted it manfully, and
got back to memphis by the th. a chief part of the enterprise was
to destroy the rebel cavalry commanded by general forrest, who were
a constant threat to our railway communications in middle
tennessee, and i committed this task to brigadier-general w. sooy
smith. general hurlbut had in his command about seven thousand five
hundred cavalry, scattered from columbus, kentucky, to corinth,
mississippi, and we proposed to make up an aggregate cavalry force
of about seven thousand "effective," out of these and the
twenty-five hundred which general smith had brought with him from
middle tennessee. with this force general smith was ordered to move
from memphis straight for meridian, mississippi, and to start by
february st. i explained to him personally the nature of forrest
as a man, and of his peculiar force; told him that in his route he
was sure to encounter forrest, who always attacked with a vehemence
for which he must be prepared, and that, after he had repelled the
first attack, he must in turn assume the most determined offensive,
overwhelm him and utterly destroy his whole force. i knew that
forrest could not have more than four thousand cavalry, and my own
movement would give employment to every other man of the rebel army
not immediately present with him, so that he (general smith) might
safely act on the hypothesis i have stated.
having completed all these preparations in memphis, being
satisfied that the cavalry force would be ready to start by the st
of february, and having seen general hurlbut with his two divisions
embark in steamers for vicksburg, i also reembarked for the same
destination on the th of january.
on the st of february we rendezvoused in vicksburg, where i
found a spy who had been sent out two weeks before, had been to
meridian, and brought back correct information of the state of
facts in the interior of mississippi. lieutenant-general (bishop)
polk was in chief command, with headquarters at meridian, and had
two divisions of infantry, one of which (general loring's) was
posted at canton, mississippi, the other (general french's) at
brandon. he had also two divisions of cavalry—armstrong's,
composed of the three brigades of ross, stark, and wirt adams,
which were scattered from the neighborhood of yazoo city to jackson
and below; and forrest's, which was united, toward memphis, with
headquarters at como. general polk seemed to have no suspicion of
our intentions to disturb his serenity.
accordingly, on the morning of february d, we started in two
columns, each of two divisions, preceded by a light force of
cavalry, commanded by colonel e. f. winslow. general mcpherson
commanded the right column, and general hurlbut the left. the
former crossed the big black at the railroad-bridge, and the latter
seven miles above, at messinger's. we were lightly equipped as to
wagons, and marched without deployment straight for meridian,
distant one hundred and fifty miles. we struck the rebel cavalry
beyond the big black, and pushed them pell-mell into and beyond
jackson during the th. the next day we reached brandon, and on the
th morton, where we perceived signs of an infantry concentration,
but the enemy did not give us battle, and retreated before us. the
rebel cavalry were all around us, so we kept our columns compact
and offered few or no chances for their dashes. as far as morton we
had occupied two roads, but there we were forced into one. toward
evening of the th, hurlbut's column passed through decatur, with
orders to go into camp four miles beyond at a creek. mcpherson's
head of column was some four miles behind, and i personally
detached one of hurlbut's regiments to guard the cross-roads at
decatur till the head of mcpherson's column should come in sight.
intending to spend the night in decatur, i went to a double
log-house, and arranged with the lady for some supper. we unsaddled
our horses, tied them to the fence inside the yard, and, being
tired, i lay down on a bed and fell asleep. presently i heard
shouts and hallooing, and then heard pistol-shots close to the
house. my aide, major audenried, called me and said we were
attacked by rebel cavalry, who were all around us. i jumped up and
inquired where was the regiment of infantry i had myself posted at
the cross-roads. he said a few moments before it had marched past
the house, following the road by which general hurlbut had gone,
and i told him to run, overtake it, and bring it back. meantime, i
went out into the back-yard, saw wagons passing at a run down the
road, and horsemen dashing about in a cloud of dust, firing their
pistols, their shots reaching the house in which we were. gathering
the few orderlies and clerks that were about, i was preparing to
get into a corn-crib at the back side of the lot, wherein to defend
ourselves, when i saw audenried coming back with the regiment, on a
run, deploying forward as they came. this regiment soon cleared the
place and drove the rebel cavalry back toward the south, whence
they had come.
it transpired that the colonel of this infantry regiment, whose
name i do not recall, had seen some officers of mcpherson's staff
(among them inspector-general strong) coming up the road at a
gallop, raising a cloud of duet; supposing them to be the head of
mcpherson's column, and being anxious to get into camp before dark,
he had called in his pickets and started down the road, leaving me
perfectly exposed. some straggling wagons, escorted by a new jersey
regiment, were passing at the time, and composed the rear of
hurlbut's train. the rebel cavalry, seeing the road clear of
troops, and these wagons passing, struck them in flank, shot down
the mules of three or four wagons, broke the column, and began a
general skirmish. the escort defended their wagons as well as they
could, and thus diverted their attention; otherwise i would surely
have been captured. in a short time the head of mcpherson's column
came up, went into camp, and we spent the night in decatur.
the next day we pushed on, and on the th entered meridian, the
enemy retreating before us toward demopolis, alabama. we at once
set to work to destroy an arsenal, immense storehouses, and the
railroad in every direction. we staid in meridian five days,
expecting every hour to hear of general sooy smith, but could get
no tidings of him whatever. a large force of infantry was kept at
work all the time in breaking up the mobile & ohio railroad
south and north; also the jackson & selma railroad, east and
west. i was determined to damage these roads so that they could not
be used again for hostile purposes during the rest of the war. i
never had the remotest idea of going to mobile, but had purposely
given out that idea to the people of the country, so as to deceive
the enemy and to divert their attention. many persons still insist
that, because we did not go to mobile on this occasion, i had
failed; but in the following letter to general banks, of january
st, written from vicksburg before starting for meridian, it will
be seen clearly that i indicated my intention to keep up the
delusion of an attack on mobile by land, whereas i promised him to
be back to vicksburg by the st of march, so as to cooperate with
him in his contemplated attack on shreveport:
headquarters department of the tennessee vicksburg, january ,
major-general n. p. banks, commanding department of the gulf, new
orleans.
general: i received yesterday, at the hands of captain durham,
aide-de-camp, your letter of the th inst., and hasten to reply.
captain durham has gone to the mouth of white river, en route for
little rock, and the other officers who accompanied him have gone
up to cairo, as i understand, to charter twenty-five steamboats for
the red river trip. the mississippi river, though low for the
season, is free of ice and in good boating order; but i understand
that red river is still low. i had a man in from alexandria
yesterday, who reported the falls or rapids at that place
impassable save by the smallest boats. my inland expedition is now
moving, and i will be off for jackson and meridian to-morrow. the
only fear i have is in the weather. all the other combinations are
good. i want to keep up the delusion of an attack on mobile and the
alabama river, and therefore would be obliged if you would keep up
an irritating foraging or other expedition in that direction.
my orders from general grant will not, as yet, justify me in
embarking for red river, though i am very anxious to move in that
direction. the moment i learned that you were preparing for it, i
sent a communication to admiral porter, and dispatched to general
grant at chattanooga, asking if he wanted me and steele to
cooperate with you against shreveport; and i will have his answer
in time, for you cannot do any thing till red river has twelve feet
of water on the rapids at alexandria. that will be from march to
june. i have lived on red river, and know somewhat of the phases of
that stream. the expedition on shreveport should be made rapidly,
with simultaneous movements from little rock on shreveport, from
opelousas on alexandria, and a combined force of gunboats and
transports directly up red river. admiral porter will be able to
have a splendid fleet by march st. i think steele could move with
ten thousand infantry and five thousand cavalry. i could take about
ten thousand, and you could, i suppose, have the same. your
movement from opelousas, simultaneous with mine up the river, would
compel dick taylor to leave fort de russy (near marksville), and
the whole combined force could appear at shreveport about a day
appointed beforehand.
i doubt if the enemy will risk a siege at shreveport, although i am
informed they are fortifying the place, and placing many heavy guns
in position. it would be better for us that they should stand
there, as we might make large and important captures. but i do not
believe the enemy will fight a force of thirty thousand men, acting
in concert with gunboats.
i will be most happy to take part in the proposed expedition, and
hope, before you have made your final dispositions, that i will
have the necessary permission. half the army of the tennessee is
near the tennessee river, beyond huntsville, alabama, awaiting the
completion of the railroad, and, by present orders, i will be
compelled to hasten there to command it in person, unless meantime
general grant modifies the plan. i have now in this department only
the force left to hold the river and the posts, and i am seriously
embarrassed by the promises made the veteran volunteers for
furlough. i think, by march st, i can put afloat for shreveport
ten thousand men, provided i succeed in my present movement in
cleaning out the state of mississippi, and in breaking up the
railroads about meridian.
i am, with great respect, your obedient servant,
w. t. sherman, major-general, commanding.
the object of the meridian expedition was to strike the roads
inland, so to paralyze the rebel forces that we could take from the
defense of the mississippi river the equivalent of a corps of
twenty thousand men, to be used in the next georgia campaign; and
this was actually done. at the same time, i wanted to destroy
general forrest, who, with an irregular force of cavalry, was
constantly threatening memphis and the river above, as well as our
routes of supply in middle tennessee. in this we failed utterly,
because general w. sooy smith did not fulfill his orders, which
were clear and specific, as contained in my letter of instructions
to him of january th, at memphis, and my personal explanations to
him at the same time. instead of starting at the date ordered,
february st, he did not leave memphis till the th, waiting for
warings brigade that was ice-bound near columbus, kentucky; and
then, when he did start, he allowed general forrest to head him off
and to defeat him with an inferior force, near west point, below
okalona, on the mobile & ohio railroad.
we waited at meridian till the th to hear from general smith,
but hearing nothing whatever, and having utterly destroyed the
railroads in and around that junction, i ordered general mcpherson
to move back slowly toward canton. with winslow's cavalry, and
hurlbut's infantry, i turned north to marion, and thence to a place
called "union," whence i dispatched the cavalry farther north to
philadelphia and louisville, to feel as it were for general smith,
and then turned all the infantry columns toward canton,
mississippi. on the th we all reached canton, but we had not
heard a word of general smith, nor was it until some time after (at
vicksburg) that i learned the whole truth of general smith's
movement and of his failure. of course i did not and could not
approve of his conduct, and i know that he yet chafes under the
censure. i had set so much store on his part of the project that i
was disappointed, and so reported officially to general grant.
general smith never regained my confidence as a soldier, though i
still regard him as a most accomplished gentleman and a skillful
engineer. since the close of the war he has appealed to me to
relieve him of that censure, but i could not do it, because it
would falsify history.
having assembled all my troops in and about canton, on the th
of february i left them under the command of the senior
major-general, hurlbut, with orders to remain till about the d of
march, and then to come into vicksburg leisurely; and, escorted by
winslow's cavalry, i rode into vicksburg on the last day of
february. there i found letters from general grant, at nashville,
and general banks, at new orleans, concerning his (general banks's)
projected movement up red river. i was authorized by the former to
contribute aid to general banks for a limited time; but general
grant insisted on my returning in person to my own command about
huntsville, alabama, as soon as possible, to prepare for the spring
campaign.
about this time we were much embarrassed by a general order of
the war department, promising a thirty-days furlough to all
soldiers who would "veteranize"—viz., reenlist for the rest
of the war. this was a judicious and wise measure, because it
doubtless secured the services of a very large portion of the men
who had almost completed a three-years enlistment, and were
therefore veteran soldiers in feeling and in habit. but to furlough
so many of our men at that instant of time was like disbanding an
army in the very midst of battle.
in order to come to a perfect understanding with general banks,
i took the steamer diana and ran down to new orleans to see him.
among the many letters which i found in vicksburg on my return from
meridian was one from captain d. f. boyd, of louisiana, written
from the jail in natchez, telling me that he was a prisoner of war
in our hands; had been captured in louisiana by some of our scouts;
and he bespoke my friendly assistance. boyd was professor of
ancient languages at the louisiana seminary of learning during my
administration, in -'; was an accomplished scholar, of
moderate views in politics, but, being a virginian, was drawn, like
all others of his kind, into the vortex of the rebellion by the
events of , which broke up colleges and every thing at the
south. natchez, at this time, was in my command, and was held by a
strong division, commanded by brigadier-general j. w. davidson. in
the diana we stopped at natchez, and i made a hasty inspection of
the place. i sent for boyd, who was in good health, but quite
dirty, and begged me to take him out of prison, and to effect his
exchange. i receipted for him; took him along with me to new
orleans; offered him money, which he declined; allowed him to go
free in the city; and obtained from general banks a promise to
effect his exchange, which was afterward done. boyd is now my
legitimate successor in louisiana, viz., president of the louisiana
university, which is the present title of what had been the
seminary of learning. after the war was over, boyd went back to
alexandria, reorganized the old institution, which i visited in
 but the building was burnt down by an accident or by an
incendiary about , and the institution was then removed to
baton rouge, where it now is, under its new title of the university
of louisiana.
we reached new orleans on the d of march. i found general
banks, with his wife and daughter, living in a good house, and he
explained to me fully the position and strength of his troops, and
his plans of action for the approaching campaign. i dined with him,
and, rough as i was—just out of the woods—attended,
that night, a very pleasant party at the house of a lady, whose
name i cannot recall, but who is now the wife of captain arnold,
fifth united states artillery. at this party were also mr. and mrs.
frank howe. i found new orleans much changed since i had been
familiar with it in  and in -'. it was full of officers
and soldiers. among the former were general t. w. sherman, who had
lost a leg at port hudson, and general charles p: stone, whom i
knew so well in california, and who is now in the egyptian service
as chief of staff. the bulk of general banks's army was about
opelousas, under command of general franklin, ready to move on
alexandria. general banks seemed to be all ready, but intended to
delay his departure a few days to assist in the inauguration of a
civil government for louisiana, under governor hahn. in lafayette
square i saw the arrangements of scaffolding for the fireworks and
benches for the audience. general banks urged me to remain over the
th of march, to participate in the ceremonies, which he explained
would include the performance of the "anvil chorus" by all the
bands of his army, and during the performance the church-bells were
to be rung, and cannons were to be fired by electricity. i regarded
all such ceremonies as out of place at a time when it seemed to me
every hour and every minute were due to the war. general banks's
movement, however, contemplated my sending a force of ten thousand
men in boats up red river from vicksburg, and that a junction
should occur at alexandria by march th. i therefore had no time
to wait for the grand pageant of the th of march, but took my
departure from new orleans in the diana the evening of march
d.
on the next day, march th, i wrote to general banks a letter,
which was extremely minute in conveying to him how far i felt
authorized to go under my orders from general grant. at that time
general grant commanded the military division of the mississippi,
embracing my own department of the tennessee and that of general
steele in arkansas, but not that of general banks in louisiana.
general banks was acting on his own powers, or under the
instructions of general halleck in washington, and our assistance
to him was designed as a loan of ten thousand men for a period of
thirty days. the instructions of march th to general a. j. smith,
who commanded this detachment, were full and explicit on this
point. the diana reached vicksburg on the th, where i found that
the expeditionary army had come in from canton. one division of
five thousand men was made up out of hurlbut's command, and placed
under brigadier-general t. kilby smith; and a similar division was
made out of mcpherson's and hurlbut's troops, and placed under
brigadier-general joseph a. mower; the whole commanded by
brigadier-general a. j. smith. general hurlbut, with the rest of
his command, returned to memphis, and general mcpherson remained at
vicksburg. general a. j. smith's command was in due season
embarked, and proceeded to red river, which it ascended, convoyed
by admiral porter's fleet. general mower's division was landed near
the outlet of the atchafalaya, marched up by land and captured the
fort below alexandria known as fort de russy, and the whole fleet
then proceeded up to alexandria, reaching it on the day appointed,
viz., march th, where it waited for the arrival of general banks,
who, however, did not come till some days after. these two
divisions participated in the whole of general banks's unfortunate
red river expedition, and were delayed so long up red river, and
subsequently on the mississippi, that they did not share with their
comrades the successes and glories of the atlanta campaign, for
which i had designed them; and, indeed, they, did not join our army
till just in time to assist general george h. thomas to defeat
general hood before nashville, on the th and th of december,
general grant's letter of instructions, which was brought me by
general butterfield, who had followed me to new orleans, enjoined
on me, after concluding with general banks the details for his red
river expedition, to make all necessary arrangements for
furloughing the men entitled to that privilege, and to hurry back
to the army at huntsville, alabama. i accordingly gave the
necessary orders to general mcpherson, at vicksburg, and continued
up the river toward memphis. on our way we met captain badeau, of
general grant's staff, bearing the following letter, of march th,
which i answered on the th, and sent the answer by general
butterfield, who had accompanied me up from new orleans. copies of
both were also sent to general mcpherson, at vicksburg:
[private.]
nashville, tennessee, march , 
dear sherman: the bill reviving the grade of lieutenant-general in
the army has become a law, and my name has been sent to the senate
for the place.
i now receive orders to report at washington immediately, in
person, which indicates either a confirmation or a likelihood of
confirmation. i start in the morning to comply with the order, but
i shall say very distinctly on my arrival there that i shall accept
no appointment which will require me to make that city my
headquarters. this, however, is not what i started out to write
about.
while i have been eminently successful in this war, in at least
gaining the confidence of the public, no one feels more than i how
much of this success is due to the energy, skill, and the
harmonious putting forth of that energy and skill, of those whom it
has been my good fortune to have occupying subordinate positions
under me.
there are many officers to whom these remarks are applicable to a
greater or less degree, proportionate to their ability as soldiers;
but what i want is to express my thanks to you and mcpherson, as
the men to whom, above all others, i feel indebted for whatever i
have had of success. how far your advice and suggestions have been
of assistance, you know. how far your execution of whatever has
been given you to do entitles you to the reward i am receiving, you
cannot know as well as i do. i feel all the gratitude this letter
would express, giving it the most flattering construction.
the word you i use in the plural, intending it for mcpherson also.
i should write to him, and will some day, but, starting in the
morning, i do not know that i will find time just now. your
friend,
u. s. grant, major-general.
near memphis, march , 
general grant.
dear general: i have your more than kind and characteristic letter
of the th, and will send a copy of it to general mcpherson at
once.
you do yourself injustice and us too much honor in assigning to us
so large a share of the merits which have led to your high
advancement. i know you approve the friendship i have ever
professed to you, and will permit me to continue as heretofore to
manifest it on all proper occasions.
you are now washington's legitimate successor, and occupy a
position of almost dangerous elevation; but if you can continue as
heretofore to be yourself, simple, honest, and unpretending, you
will enjoy through life the respect and love of friends, and the
homage of millions of human beings who will award to you a large
share for securing to them and their descendants a government of
law and stability.
i repeat, you do general mcpherson and myself too much honor. at
belmont you manifested your traits, neither of us being near; at
donelson also you illustrated your whole character. i was not near,
and general mcpherson in too subordinate a capacity to influence
you.
until you had won donelson, i confess i was almost cowed by the
terrible array of anarchical elements that presented themselves at
every point; but that victory admitted the ray of light which i
have followed ever since.
i believe you are as brave, patriotic, and just, as the great
prototype washington; as unselfish, kind-hearted, and honest, as a
man should be; but the chief characteristic in your nature is the
simple faith in success you have always manifested, which i can
liken to nothing else than the faith a christian has in his
saviour.
this faith gave you victory at shiloh and vicksburg. also, when you
have completed your best preparations, you go into battle without
hesitation, as at chattanooga—no doubts, no reserve; and i
tell you that it was this that made us act with confidence. i knew
wherever i was that you thought of me, and if i got in a tight
place you would come—if alive.
my only points of doubt were as to your knowledge of grand
strategy, and of books of science and history; but i confess your
common-sense seems to have supplied all this.
now as to the future. do not stay in washington. halleck is better
qualified than you are to stand the buffets of intrigue and policy.
come out west; take to yourself the whole mississippi valley; let
us make it dead-sure, and i tell you the atlantic slope and pacific
shores will follow its destiny as sure as the limbs of a tree live
or die with the main trunk! we have done much; still much remains
to be done. time and time's influences are all with us; we could
almost afford to sit still and let these influences work. even in
the seceded states your word now would go further than a
president's proclamation, or an act of congress.
for god's sake and for your country's sake, come out of washington!
i foretold to general halleck, before he left corinth, the
inevitable result to him, and i now exhort you to come out west.
here lies the seat of the coming empire; and from the west, when
our task is done, we will make short work of charleston and
richmond, and the impoverished coast of the atlantic. your sincere
friend,
we reached memphis on the th, where i remained some days, but
on the th of march received from general grant a dispatch to
hurry to nashville in person by the th, if possible. disposing of
all matters then pending, i took a steamboat to cairo, the cars
thence to louisville and nashville, reaching that place on the th
of march, .
i found general grant there. he had been to washington and back,
and was ordered to return east to command all the armies of the
united states, and personally the army of the potomac. i was to
succeed him in command of the military division of the mississippi,
embracing the departments of the ohio, cumberland, tennessee, and
arkansas. general grant was of course very busy in winding up all
matters of business, in transferring his command to me, and in
preparing for what was manifest would be the great and closing
campaign of our civil war. mrs. grant and some of their children
were with him, and occupied a large house in nashville, which was
used as an office, dwelling, and every thing combined.
on the th of march i had issued orders assuming command of the
military division of the mississippi, and was seated in the office,
when the general came in and said they were about to present him a
sword, inviting me to come and see the ceremony. i went back into
what was the dining-room of the house; on the table lay a rose-wood
box, containing a sword, sash, spurs, etc., and round about the
table were grouped mrs. grant, nelly, and one or two of the boys. i
was introduced to a large, corpulent gentleman, as the mayor, and
another citizen, who had come down from galena to make this
presentation of a sword to their fellow-townsman. i think that
rawlins, bowers, badeau, and one or more of general grant's
personal staff, were present. the mayor rose and in the most
dignified way read a finished speech to general grant, who stood,
as usual, very awkwardly; and the mayor closed his speech by
handing him the resolutions of the city council engrossed on
parchment, with a broad ribbon and large seal attached. after the
mayor had fulfilled his office so well, general grant said: "mr.
mayor, as i knew that this ceremony was to occur, and as i am not
used to speaking, i have written something in reply." he then began
to fumble in his pockets, first his breast-coat pocket, then his
pants, vest; etc., and after considerable delay he pulled out a
crumpled piece of common yellow cartridge-paper, which he handed to
the mayor. his whole manner was awkward in the extreme, yet
perfectly characteristic, and in strong contrast with the elegant
parchment and speech of the mayor. when read, however, the
substance of his answer was most excellent, short, concise, and, if
it had been delivered by word of mouth, would have been all that
the occasion required.
i could not help laughing at a scene so characteristic of the
man who then stood prominent before the country; and to whom all
had turned as the only one qualified to guide the nation in a war
that had become painfully critical. with copies of the few letters
referred to, and which seem necessary to illustrate the
subject-matter, i close this chapter:
steamer diana (under weigh), march , 
major-general n. p. banks, commanding department of the gulf, new
orleans.
general: i had the honor to receive your letter of the d instant
yesterday at new orleans, but was unable to answer, except
verbally, and i now reduce it to writing.
i will arrive at vicksburg the th instant, and i expect to meet
there my command from canton, out of which i will select two
divisions of about ten thousand men, embark them under a good
commander, and order him:
st. to rendezvous at the mouth of red river, and, in concert with
admiral porter (if he agree), to strike harrisonburg a hard
blow.
d. to return to red river and ascend it, aiming to reach
alexandria on the th of march, to report to you.
d. that, as this command is designed to operate by water, it will
not be encumbered with much land transportation, say two wagons to
a regiment, but with an ample supply of stores, including mortars
and heavy rifled guns, to be used against fortified places.
th. that i have calculated, and so reported to general grant, that
this detachment of his forces in no event is to go beyond
shreveport, and that you will spare them the moment you can, trying
to get them back to the mississippi river in thirty days from the
time they actually enter red river.
the year is wearing away fast, and i would like to carry to general
grant at huntsville, alabama, every man of his military division,
as early in april as possible, for i am sure we ought to move from
the base of the tennessee river to the south before the season is
too far advanced, say as early as april th next.
i feel certain of your complete success, provided you make the
concentration in time, to assure which i will see in person to the
embarkation and dispatch of my quota, and i will write to general
steele, conveying to him my personal and professional opinion that
the present opportunity is the most perfect one that will ever
offer itself to him to clean out his enemies in arkansas.
wishing you all honor and success, i am, with respect, your friend
and servant,
w. t. sherman, major-general.
vicksburg, march , 
brigadier-general a. j. smith, commanding expedition up red river,
vicksburg, mississippi.
general: by an order this day issued, you are to command a strong,
well-appointed detachment of the army of the tennessee, sent to
reinforce a movement up red river, but more especially against the
fortified position at shreveport.
you will embark your command as soon as possible, little encumbered
with wagons or wheeled vehicles, but well supplied with fuel,
provisions, and ammunition. take with you the twelve mortars, with
their ammunition, and all the thirty-pound parrotts the
ordnance-officer will supply. proceed to the mouth of red river and
confer with admiral porter. consult with him, and in all the
expedition rely on him implicitly, as he is the approved friend of
the army of the tennessee, and has been associated with us from the
beginning. i have undertaken with general banks that you will be at
alexandria, louisiana, on or before the th day of march; and you
will, if time allows, cooperate with the navy in destroying
harrisonburg, up black river; but as i passed red river yesterday i
saw admiral porter, and he told me he had already sent an
expedition to harrisonburg, so that i suppose that part of the plan
will be accomplished before you reach red river; but, in any event,
be careful to reach alexandria about the th of march.
general banks will start by land from franklin, in the teche
country, either the th or th, and will march via opelousas to
alexandria. you will meet him there, report to him, and act under
his orders. my understanding with him is that his forces will move
by land, via natchitoches, to shreveport, while the gunboat-fleet
is to ascend the river with your transports in company. red river
is very low for the season, and i doubt if any of the boats can
pass the falls or rapids at alexandria. what general banks proposes
to do in that event i do not know; but my own judgment is that
shreveport ought not to be attacked until the gunboats can reach
it. not that a force marching by land cannot do it alone, but it
would be bad economy in war to invest the place with an army so far
from heavy guns, mortars, ammunition, and provisions, which can
alone reach shreveport by water. still, i do not know about general
banks's plans in that event; and whatever they may be, your duty
will be to conform, in the most hearty manner.
my understanding with general banks is that he will not need the
cooperation of your force beyond thirty days from the date you
reach red river. as soon as he has taken shreveport, or as soon as
he can spare you, return to vicksburg with all dispatch, gather up
your detachments, wagons, tents, transportation, and all property
pertaining to so much of the command as belongs to the sixteenth
army corps, and conduct it to memphis, where orders will await you.
my present belief is your division, entire, will be needed with the
army of the tennessee, about huntsville or bridgeport. still, i
will leave orders with general, hurlbut, at memphis, for you on
your return.
i believe if water will enable the gunboats to cross the rapids at
alexandria, you will be able to make a quick, strong, and effective
blow at our enemy in the west, thus widening the belt of our
territory, and making the breach between the confederate government
and its outlying trans-mississippi department more perfect.
it is understood that general steele makes a simultaneous move from
little rock, on shreveport or natchitoches, with a force of about
ten thousand men. banks will have seventeen thousand, and you ten
thousand. if these can act concentrically and simultaneously, you
will make short work of it, and then general banks will have enough
force to hold as much of the red river country as he deems wise,
leaving you to bring to general grant's main army the seven
thousand five hundred men of the sixteenth corps now with you.
having faith in your sound judgment and experience, i confide this
important and delicate command to you, with certainty that you will
harmonize perfectly with admiral porter and general banks, with
whom you are to act, and thereby insure success.
i am, with respect, your obedient servant,
w. t. sherman, major-general commanding.
memphis, march , 
major general mcpherson, commanding, etc, vicksburg,
mississippi
dear general: i wrote you at length on the th, by a special
bearer of dispatches, and now make special orders to cover the
movements therein indicated. it was my purpose to await your
answer, but i am summoned by general grant to be in nashville on
the th, and it will keep me moving night and day to get there by
that date. i must rely on you, for you understand that we must
reenforce the great army at the centre (chattanooga) as much as
possible, at the same time not risking the safety of any point on
the mississippi which is fortified and armed with heavy guns. i
want you to push matters as rapidly as possible, and to do all you
can to put two handsome divisions of your own corps at cairo, ready
to embark up the tennessee river by the th or th of april at
the very furthest. i wish it could be done quicker; but the promise
of those thirty-days furloughs in the states of enlistment, though
politic, is very unmilitary. it deprives us of our ability to
calculate as to time; but do the best you can. hurlbut can do
nothing till a. j. smith returns from red river. i will then order
him to occupy grenada temporarily, and to try and get those
locomotives that we need here. i may also order him with cavalry
and infantry to march toward tuscaloosa, at the same time that we
move from the tennessee river about chattanooga.
i don't know as yet the grand strategy of the next campaign, but on
arrival at nashville i will soon catch the main points, and will
advise you of them..
steal a furlough and run to baltimore incog.; but get back in time
to take part in the next grand move.
write me fully and frequently of your progress. i have ordered the
quartermaster to send down as many boats as he can get, to
facilitate your movements. mules, wagons, etc., can come up
afterward by transient boats. i am truly your friend,
w. t. sherman, major-general commanding.
[special field order no. .]
headquarters department of the tennessee memphis, march ,
. major-general mcpherson will organize two good divisions of his
corps (seventeenth) of about five thousand men, each embracing in
part the reenlisted veterans of his corps whose furloughs will
expire in april, which he will command in person, and will
rendezvous at cairo, illinois, and report by telegraph and letter
to the general commanding at department headquarters, wherever they
may be. these divisions will be provided with new arms and
accoutrements, and land transportation (wagons and mules) out of
the supplies now at vicksburg, which will be conveyed to cairo by
or before april th.
. during the absence of general mcpherson from the district of
vicksburg, major-general hurlbut will exercise command over all the
troops in the department of the tennessee from cairo to natchez,
inclusive, and will receive special instructions from department
headquarters.
by order of major-general w. t. sherman:
l. m. dayton, aide-de-camp.
report of brigadier-general g. w. morgan.
steamer empress, january , .
major j. h. hammond, chief of staff:
sir: on the st instant, while pressed by many arduous duties, i
was requested to report to the commanding general the operations of
my division during the affair of the th, the action of the th,
and the battle of the th ult.
i had not received the report of subordinate commanders, nor had i
time to review the report i have the honor to submit.
herewith i have the honor to forward these reports, connected with
which i will submit a few remarks.
brigadier-general blair speaks of having discovered, while on his
retreat from the enemy's works, a broad and easy road running from
the left of my position to the enemy's lines. the road is neither
broad nor easy, and was advanced over by de courcey when leading
his brigade to the charge. the road general blair speaks of is the
one running from lake's landing and intersecting with the vicksburg
road on the chickasaw bluffs. its existence was known to me on the
th ult., but it was left open intentionally by the enemy, and was
commanded by a direct and cross fire from batteries and rifle-pits.
the withdrawal of his brigade from the assault by colonel de
courcey was justified by the failure of the corps of a. j. smith,
and the command of colonel lindsey, to advance simultaneously to
the assault. both had the same difficulties to
encounter—impassable bayous. the enemy's line of battle was
concave, and de courcey advanced against his centre—hence he
sustained a concentric fire, and the withdrawal of steele from the
front of the enemy's right on the th ult. enabled the enemy on
the following day to concentrate his right upon his centre.
i regret to find, from the report of brigadier-general thayer, some
one regiment skulked; this i did not observe, nor is it mentioned
by general blair, though his were the troops which occupied that
portion of the field. as far as my observation extended, the troops
bore themselves nobly; but the sixteenth ohio infantry was peerless
on the field, as it had ever been in camp or on the march.
lieutenant-colonel kershner, commanding, was wounded and taken
prisoner. he is an officer of rare merit, and deserves to command a
brigade. lieutenant-colonel dieter, commanding the fifty-eighth
ohio, was killed within the enemy's works; and lieutenant-colonel
monroe, twenty-second kentucky, was struck down at the head of his
regiment.
i again express my profound acknowledgments to brigadier-generals
blair and thayer, and colonels de conrcey, lindsey, and sheldon,
brigade commanders. also to major m. c. garber, assistant
quartermaster; captain s. s. lyon, acting topographical engineer;
lieutenant burdick, acting ordnance officer; lieutenant hutchins,
acting chief of staff; lieutenants h. g. fisher and smith, of
signal corps; lieutenant e. d. saunders, my acting assistant
adjutant-general; and lieutenants english and montgomery, acting
aides-de-camp, for the efficient services rendered me.
nor can i close this report without speaking in terms of high
praise of the meritorious and gallant services of captains foster
and lamphier. their batteries silenced several of the enemy's
works, and throughout the operations rendered good service. my
sincere acknowledgments are also due to captain griffith,
commanding first iowa battery, and captain hoffman, commanding
fourth ohio battery.
i am, sir, very respectfully, your obedient servant,
george w. morgan, brigadier-general volunteers.
cincinnati, february , .
my dear general: regarding the attack at chickasaw bayou, my record
shows the position of steele on the left; morgan to his right;
morgan l. smith to his right, and a. j. smith on the extreme right;
the latter not expected to accomplish much more than a diversion,
the result to come from the three other divisions, morgan having
the best opportunity. saturday night they were in position; you
were at lake's plantation, right and rear of morgan.
the attack for lodgment on the hills was ordered for sunday
morning, december th. i was sent to a. j. smith before daylight,
and returned to you soon after. you were with morgan. you had fully
explained to him the importance of his success, and that he should
be present with the attacking column, which was to be a part of his
division, supported by the remainder, and by blair's brigade of
steele's division cooperating. the attack was to be simultaneous,
by the four divisions, on a signal.
morgan's answer to you was that, when the signal was given, he
would lead his attack, and with his life he would be on the bluffs
in fifteen minutes. he seemed of positive knowledge, and as sure of
success. you then retired to a central point, to be in easy
communication with steele and morgan l. smith. the attack was made,
and developed, in the case of steele, m. l. smith, and a. j. smith,
that to cross the bayou was impossible, if opposed by any force,
and in each they were by a strong one. morgan's attacking force
succeeded in getting across the causeway and marsh, but he did not
go with it, nor support it with more men, and a large number were
captured from blair's brigade after gaining the enemy's last line
of works covering the bayou. at the time everybody blamed and
criticised morgan with the failure. you felt from the advance of
his attack it must be successful, and, as it pushed forward, you
sent me to urge on m. l. smith, as morgan was over, and he, smith,
must aid by persistent attack, and give morgan as good a chance as
could be to make his lodgment....
i am, etc., l. m. dayton late colonel of the staff, now of
cincinnati, ohio general w. t. sherman, st. louis, missouri
" . . . . the expedition was wonderfully well provided with
provisions, transportation, and munitions, and even axes, picks,
and shovels, so much in use later in the war, evidenced the
forethought that governed this force. the boats, from their open
lower deck construction, proved admirable for transports, but their
tinder-box construction made fire-traps of them, requiring
unremitting vigilance. these points were well understood, and the
readiness with which the troops adapted themselves to circumstances
was a constant source of wonder and congratulations.
"the fleet collected at friar's point for final orders, and there
the order of sailing was laid down with great minuteness, and
private instructions issued to commanders of divisions, all of whom
had personal interviews with the commanding general, and received
personal explanations on pretty much every point involved. our
headquarters boat, the forest queen, was not very comfortable, nor
well provided, but general sherman submitted cheerfully, on the
grounds of duty, and thought conway a fine fellow. i was only able
to concede that he was a good steamboat captain....
"our camp appointments were spartan in the extreme, and in their
simplicity would have met the demands of any demagogue in the land.
the nights were cold and damp, and general sherman uncomfortably
active in his preparations, so that the assistant adjutant-general
had no very luxurious post just then. we were surrounded with
sloughs. the ground was wet, and the water, although in winter, was
very unwholesome. many of our men, to this day, have reminders of
the yazoo in ague, fevers, and diseases of the bowels. cavalry was
useless. one battalion of illinois cavalry was strongly suspected
of camping in the timber, until time passed enough to justify the
suspicion of having been somewhere. really the strength of
vicksburg was in being out of reach of attack....
"my orders were to learn and report what was going on on the right,
particularly to try and form an idea of the enemy's force in front
of m. l. smith's division, and at the sand-bar. leaving my horse
close in the rear of the sixth missouri, when the fire became too
heavy for riding, i succeeded, by taking frequent cover, in
reaching unhurt the verge of the bayou among the drift-logs. there,
by concert of action with lieutenant-colonel blood, of the sixth
missouri, his regiment, and the thirteenth regular infantry, kept
up a heavy fire on everything that showed along the levee and
earthworks in front. the enemy were behind the embankment, not over
one hundred and fifty yards across the bayou. several officers,
including colonel blood, colonel kilby smith, and myself, managed,
by getting on the piles of drift, to see over the levee through the
cleared fields beyond, even to the foot of the bluff. the chips and
twigs flew around lively enough, but we staid up long enough to
make sure that the enemy had as many men behind the levee as could
get cover. we saw, also, a line of rifle-pits in the rear,
commanding the rear of the levee, and still beyond, winding along
the foot of the bluff, a road worn by long use deep into the
side-hill, and with the side next us strengthened with a good
earthwork, affording a covered line of communication in the rear.
the fire of our men was so well maintained that we were able to see
all these things, say a minute or more. some of those who ventured
were wounded, but those mentioned and myself escaped unhurt. i
advised that men enough to hold the position, once across—say
three hundred—should make a rush (protected as our lookout
had been by a heavy fire) across the sand-bar, and get a footing
under the other bank of the bayou, as the nucleus of an attacking
force, if general sherman decided to attack there, or to make a
strong diversion if the attack was made at the head of chickasaw
bayou, in front of morgan. general a. j. smith, commanding first
and second divisions, approved of this. while returning to general
sherman, i passed along the second and part of the third division.
on the left of the second i found a new illinois regiment, high up
in numbers, working its way into position. the colonel, a brave but
inexperienced officer, was trying to lead his men according to the
popular pictorial idea, viz., riding in advance waving his sword. i
was leading my horse, and taking advantage of such cover as i could
find on my course, but this man acted so bravely that i tried to
save him. he did not accept my expostulations with very good grace,
but was not rough about it. while i was begging him to dismount, he
waved his sword and advanced. in a second he was shot, through the
chest, and dropped from his horse, plucky to the last. he died, i
was told, within the hour. many of the regiments were new and
inexperienced, but as a rule behaved well. the fire along the bayou
was severe, but not very fatal, on account of the cover. i was
constantly asked what news from grant, for from the moment of our
arrival in the yazoo we were in expectation of either hearing his
guns in the rear, or of having communication with him. this
encouraged the men greatly, but the long waiting was disappointing,
as the enemy was evidently in large force in the plenty of works,
and a very strong position. careful estimates and available
information placed their force at fifteen to twenty thousand men. i
returned to headquarters about the middle of the afternoon, and
made my report to the general. we were busy till after midnight,
and again early in the morning of the th, in preparing orders for
the attack. these were unusually minute in detail. it seemed as
though no contingency was left unprovided for. urgent orders and
cautions as to rations and ammunition were given. drawings of the
line of attack, orders for supports, all and everything was
foreseen and given in writing, with personal explanations to
commanders of divisions, brigades, and even commanders of
regiments. indeed, the commanding general, always careful as to
detail, left nothing to chance, and with experienced and ordinate
officers we would have succeeded, for the troops were good. the
general plan involved a feint on our left toward haines's bluff, by
the navy, under admiral porter, with whom we were in constant
communication, while between him and general sherman perfect
harmony existed. on the right a demonstration by a. j. smith was to
be made. the second division (stuart's) was to cross the sand-bar,
and the third (general morgan's) was to cross on a small bridge
over the dough at the head of chickasaw bayou, and, supported by
steele, was to push straight for the bluff at the nearest spur
where there was a battery in position, and to effect a lodgment
there and in the earthworks. general sherman gave his orders in
person to morgan and steele. i understood morgan to promise that he
would lead his division in person, and he seemed to expect an easy
victory, and expressed himself freely to that effect. the aides
were sent out, until i was left alone with the general and a couple
of orderlies. he located himself in a position easy of access, and
the most convenient afforded to the point of attack. he directed me
to see what i could, and report if i met anything that he should
know. i galloped as fast as possible to the right, and found part
of the sixth missouri pushing over the sand-bar covered by the
thirteenth regulars with a heavy fire. we supposed, if once across,
they could get up the bank and turn the levee against the enemy,
and left with that impression. being in heavy timber, i was not
quite sure of my way back to the general, his location being new,
and therefore pushed full gallop for morgan's front, catching a
good many stray shots from the sharpshooters behind the levee, as i
was compelled to keep in sight of the bayou to hold direction.
something over half-way along morgan's division front, the
commander of a kentucky regiment hailed me and said he must have
support, as he was threatened by a masked battery, and the enemy
was in force in his front, and might cross any moment. i answered,
rather shortly, 'how the devil do you know there is a masked
battery? if you can't get over, how can the rebels get at you?' he
insisted on the battery, and danger. i finally told him the bayou
was utterly impassable there, but, if he insisted the enemy could
cross, i would insist on an advance on our side at that point.
hurrying on to make up lost time, i soon reached morgan. he was
making encouraging speeches in a general way, but stopped to ask me
questions as to steele's rank, date of commission, etc. i was very
much disturbed at this, fearing want of harmony, and rode on to
steele, whom i found cursing morgan so fiercely that i could not
exactly make out the source of the trouble, or reason why; but saw
want of concert clearly enough. i hastened back to general sherman,
and endeavored to impress my ideas on him and my fears; but, while
he admitted the facts, he could not be made to believe that any
jealousy or personal quarrel could lead to a failure to support
each other, and a neglect of duty. the signal for attack had
already been given, and the artillery had opened, when i left him
again for morgan's front. i found morgan where i left him, and the
troops advancing. i had understood that he was to lead his
division, and asked about it, but, getting no satisfaction, pushed
for the front, crossing the slough at the little bridge at the head
of the bayou. i found the willows cut off eighteen inches or two
feet long, with sharp points above the mud, making it slow and
difficult to pass, save at the bridge. i overtook the rear of the
advance about two or three hundred feet up the gentle slope, and
was astonished to find how small a force was making the attack. i
was also surprised to find that they were steele's men instead of
morgan's. i also saw several regiments across the bayou, but not
advancing; they were near the levee. a heavy artillery and infantry
fire was going on all this time. while making my way along the
column, from which there were very few falling back, a shell burst
near me, and the concussion confused me at the time and left me
with a headache for several months. when i got my wits about me
again i found a good many coming back, but the main part of the
force was compact and keeping up the fight. i did not get closer to
the woods than about five hundred feet, and found that a large
number had penetrated into the enemy's works. when our men fell
back, very few ran, but came slowly and sullenly, far more angry
than frightened. i found general frank blair on foot, and with him
colonel sea, of southwest missouri, and learned that colonel thomas
fletcher, afterward governor of missouri, was captured with many of
his men. they both insisted there on the spot, with those around
us, that if all the men ordered up had gone up, or even all that
crossed the bayou had moved forward, we could have readily
established ourselves in the enemy's works. i was firmly of the
same opinion at the time on the ground; and, an entrance effected,
we could have brought the whole force on dry ground, and had a base
of operations against vicksburg—though probably, in view of
later events, we would have had to stand a siege from pemberton's
army. after explanations with blair, i rode to where the men were,
who had crossed the bayou, but had not advanced with the others. i
found them to be de courcey's brigade; of morgan's division, which
general sherman supposed to be in advance. in fact, it was the
intended support that made the attack. a correspondence and
controversy followed between general blair and colonel de courcey,
most of which i have, but nothing came of it. on reaching the
bayou, i found that thayer's brigade, of steele's division, had in
some way lost its direction and filed off to the right. remembering
the masked battery, i suspected that had something to do with the
matter, and, on following it up, i learned that the kentucky
colonel before mentioned had appealed for aid against the masked
battery and invisible force of rebels, and that a regiment had been
ordered to him. this regiment, filing off into the timber, had been
followed by thayer's brigade, supposing it to be advancing to the
front, and thus left a single brigade to attack a superior force of
the enemy in an intrenched and naturally strong position. by the
time the mistake could be rectified, it was too late. our loss was
from one hundred and fifty to two hundred killed, and about eleven
hundred prisoners and wounded. during the afternoon i went with a
flag of truce, with reference to burying the dead. i saw between
eighty and one hundred of our men dead, all stripped. there were
others closer into the enemy's works than i was allowed to go. on
going later to where the sixth missouri crossed, i found that they
were under the bank, and had dug in with their hands and bayonets,
or anything in reach, to protect themselves from a vertical fire
from the enemy overhead, who had a heavy force there. with great
difficulty they were withdrawn at night. next day arrangements were
made to attempt a lodgment below haines's bluff: this was to be
done by steele's command, while the rest of the force attacked
again where we had already tried. during the day locomotives
whistled, and a great noise and fuss went on in our front, and we
supposed that grant was driving in pemberton, and expected firing
any moment up the yazoo or in the rear of vicksburg. not hearing
this, we concluded that pemberton was throwing his forces into
vicksburg. a heavy fog prevented steele from making his movement.
rain began to fall, and our location was not good to be in after a
heavy rain, or with the river rising. during the night (i think) of
january, , , our troops were embarked, material and provisions
having been loaded during the day. a short time before daylight of
the d, i went by order of the general commanding, to our picket
lines and carefully examined the enemy's lines, wherever a
camp-fire indicated their presence. they were not very vigilant,
and i once got close enough to hear them talk, but could understand
nothing. early in the morning i came in with the rear-guard, the
enemy advancing his pickets and main guards only, and making no
effort at all to press us. once i couldn't resist the temptation to
fire into a squad that came bolder than the rest, and the two shots
were good ones. we received a volley in return that did come very
close among us, but hurt none of my party. very soon after our
rear-guard was aboard, general sherman learned from admiral porter
that mcclernand had arrived at the mouth of the yazoo. he went,
taking me and one other staff-officer, to see mcclernand, and found
that, under an order from the president, he had taken command of
the army of the mississippi. he and his staff, of whom i only
remember two-colonels scates and braham, assistant adjutant-general
and aide-de-camp—seemed to think they had a big thing, and,
so far as i could judge, they had just that. all hands thought the
country expected them to cut their way to the gulf; and to us, who
had just come out of the swamp, the cutting didn't seem such an
easy job as to the new-comers. making due allowance for the
elevation they seemed to feel in view of their job, everything
passed off pleasantly, and we learned that general grant's
communications had been cut at holly springs by the capture of
murphy and his force (at holly springs), and that he was either in
memphis by that time or would soon be. so that, everything
considered, it was about as well that we did not get our forces on
the bluff's of walnut hill."
the above statement was sent to general sherman in a letter dated
"chicago, february ,," and signed "john h. hammond." hammond
was general sherman's assistant adjutant-general at the chickasaw
bayou.
j. e. tourtelotte, colonel and aide-de-camp.
on th december, , at chickasaw bayou, i was in command of the
thirty-first missouri volunteer infantry, first brigade, first
division, fifteenth army corps (blair's brigade). colonel wyman, of
the thirteenth illinois volunteer infantry, having been killed, i
was the senior colonel of the brigade. general blair rode up to
where my regiment lay, and said to me:
"we are to make a charge here; we will charge in two lines; your
regiment will be in the first line, and the twenty-ninth
(cavender's) will support you. form here in the timber, and move
out across the bayou on a double-quick, and go right on to the top
of the heights in your front." he then told me to await a signal. i
then attempted to make a reconnaissance of the ground over which we
would have to charge, and rode out to the open ground in my front,
and saw that there was water and soft mud in the bayou, and was
fired upon by the sharp-shooters of the enemy, and turned and went
back into the woods where my command lay. soon after that general
blair came near me, and i told him there was water and mud in the
bayou, and i doubted if we could get across. he answered me that
general morgan told him there was no water nor mud to hinder us. i
remarked that i had seen it myself, and general morgan, or any one
else, could see it if he would risk being shot at pretty lively. i
then told general blair that it was certain destruction to us if we
passed over the abatis upon the open ground where there had once
been a corn-field; that we could never reach the base of the hill.
he turned to me and said, "can't you take your regiment up there?"
i told him, "yes, i can take my regiment anywhere, because the men
do not know any better than to go," but remarked that old soldiers
could not be got to go up there. general blair then said, "tom, if
we succeed, this will be a grand thing; you will have the glory of
leading the assault." he then went on to say that general morgan's
division would support us, and they were heroes of many battles,
and pointed to the fifty-eighth ohio, then forming in the rear of
the thirteenth illinois on my right, and said: "see these men? they
are a part of morgan's division, and are heroes of many battles." i
laughingly said that they might be heroes, but the regiment did not
number as many as one of my companies. he again assured me we would
be supported by morgan's division, and all i had to do was to keep
right on and "keep going till you get into vicksburg." i took my
position in advance of my regiment and awaited the signal. when we
heard it, we raised a shout, and started at a double-quick, the
thirteenth illinois on my right. i saw no troops on my left. when
we emerged from the woods, the enemy opened upon us; crossing the
bayou under fire, and many of the men sinking in the mud and water,
our line was very much disordered, but we pretty well restored it
before reaching the abatis. here we were greatly disordered, but
somewhat restored the line on reaching the plateau or corn-field.
the twenty-ninth missouri came on, gallantly supporting us. the
thirteenth illinois came out upon the corn-field, and the
fifty-eighth ohio followed close upon it. there was firing to my
left, and as i afterward learned was from the fourth iowa of
thayer's brigade (and i believe of steele's division). i was struck
and fell, and my regiment went back in great disorder. the fire was
terrific. i saw beyond the thirteenth illinois, to my right, a
disordered line, and learned afterward it was the sixteenth ohio.
when i was taken from the field by the enemy and taken into
vicksburg, i found among the wounded and prisoners men and officers
of the sixteenth and fifty-eighth ohio, and of the twenty-ninth and
thirty-first missouri, and thirteenth illinois. after i was
exchanged and joined my command, general blair laughingly remarked
to me that i had literally obeyed his order and gone "straight on
to vicksburg." he lamented the cutting to pieces of our force on
that day. we talked the whole matter over at his headquarters
during the siege of vicksburg. he said that if the charge had been
made along our whole line with the same vigor of attack made by his
brigade, and if we had been supported as morgan promised to do, we
might have succeeded. i dissented from the opinion that we could
even then have succeeded. i asked him what excuse morgan gave for
failing to support us, and he said that colonel or general de
courcey was in some manner to blame for that, but he said morgan
was mistaken as to the nature of the ground and generally as to the
feasibility of the whole thing, and was responsible for the failure
to afford us the support he had promised; that he and general
sherman and all of them were misled by the statements and opinions
of morgan as to the situation in our front, and morgan was, on his
part, deceived by the reports of his scouts about other matters as
well as the matter of the water in the bayou.
extracts from admiral porter's journal.
sherman and i had made arrangements to capture arkansas post.
on the st of december, while preparing to go out of the yazoo, an
army officer called to see me, and said that he belonged to general
mcclernand's staff, and that the general was at the mouth of the
yazoo river, and desired to see me at once. i sent word to the
general that if he wished to see me he could have an opportunity by
calling on board my flag-ship.
a few moments after i had heard the news of mcclernand'a arrival, i
saw sherman pulling about in a boat, and hailed him, informing him
that mcclernand was at the mouth of the yazoo. sherman then came on
board, and, in consequence of this unexpected news, determined to
postpone the movement out of the yazoo river, and let mcclernand
take that upon himself.
general mcclernand took my hint and came on board the flag-ship,
but i soon discovered that any admiral, grant, sherman, or all the
generals in the army, were nobody in his estimation. sherman had
been at mcclernand's headquarters to see him and state the
condition of affairs, and he then suggested to the latter the plan
of going to arkansas post.
i had a number of fine maps hanging up in my cabin, and when
mcclernand came on board he examined them all with the eye of a
connoisseur. he then stated to me as a new thing the plan he
proposed!!! of going to arkansas post and stirring up our troops,
which had been "demoralized by the late defeat" (sherman was
present, looking daggers at him). i answered, "yes, general sherman
and myself have already arranged for going to arkansas post."
sherman then made some remark about the disposition of the troops
in the coming expedition, when mcclernand gave him rather a curt
answer. mcclernand then remarked, "if you will let me have three
gunboats, i will go and take the place." now general mcclernand had
about as much idea of what a gunboat was, or could do, as the man
in the moon. he did not know, the difference between an ironclad
and a "tin-clad." he had heard that gunboats had taken fort henry,
and that was all he knew about them. i said to him: "i'll tell you
what i will do, general mcclernand. if general sherman goes in
command of the troops, i will go myself in command of a proper
force, and will insure the capture of the post." mcclernand winced
under this, and sherman quietly walked off into the after-cabin. he
beckoned me to come there, while mcclernand was apparently deeply
engaged in studying out a chart, making believe he was interested,
in order to conceal his temper. sherman said to me: "admiral, how
could you make such a remark to mcclernand? he hates me already,
and you have made him an enemy for life."
"i don't care," said i; "he shall not treat you rudely in my cabin,
and i was glad of the opportunity of letting him know my
sentiments." by this time, general mcclernand having bottled up his
wrath, or cooled down, i went in to him and we discussed the
matter. he consented that sherman should go in command of the
troops, and the interview ended pleasantly enough.
the above extracts from admiral porter's journal were sent by the
admiral to general sherman, inclosed in a letter dated "washington,
may , ," and signed "david d. porter."
after leaving the yazoo, the army of the mississippi rendezvous was
at milliken's bend. during the night of january th or th, general
mcclernand came on board the forest queen, and with general sherman
went to the black hawk flag-boat. there an interview took place,
during which the expedition to arkansas post took shape. general
sherman having asked leave to take the post, and admiral porter
having decided to go along, mcclernand thought best to go with his
entire army, although the enemy were supposed to have only about
four or five thousand men, and the fort was little more than a
large earthwork commanding the river.
general sherman's command was then entitled the second corps, army
of the mississippi, and was comprised of the first division,
blair's, hovey's, and thayer's brigades, commanded by steele; and
the second division, commanded by david stuart, with colonels giles
a. and kilby smith commanding brigades.
our fleet was convoyed by three ironclads and several other
gunboats. the weather was bitterly cold for that latitude; we were
four days getting into the arkansas river, which we entered by the
white river cut-off; and my recollection is, that our passing the
mouth of the main river deceived the enemy as to our destination.
the entrance through the cut-off was feasible by reason of high
water, and i think made our appearance a surprise to the force at
the post. we disembarked on the morning of the th of january.
stuart's division first encountered the enemy behind an earthwork
about four miles from the fort, running across the solid ground
from the river to a swamp. general sherman in person took steele's
division, and followed a road leading to the rear of the earthwork
just mentioned. we had got fairly under way when the rebels fell
back to the fort, and mcclernand, coming up, ordered us to fall
back, and march up the river. it seemed to me then, and afterward,
that it would have been better to have marched straight to the rear
of the fort, as we started to do. we soon overtook stuart and
closed in, general sherman on the right, morgan's force on the
left, reaching to the river, where the gunboats were, while sherman
reached from the road which connected the post with the back
country, toward where the earthworks reached the river above the
fort, and threatened their communications with little rock. the
night was cold and cloudy, with some snow. there were a good many
abandoned huts to our rear, but our forces in position lay on the
frozen ground, sheltered as best they could, among the bushes and
timber. we were so close that they could have reached us any time
during the night with light artillery. the gun-boats threw heavy
shells into the fort and behind the earthworks all night, keeping
the enemy awake and anxious. the heavy boom of the artillery was
followed by the squeak, squeak of admiral porter's little tug, as
he moved around making his arrangements for the morrow. the sounds
were ridiculous by comparison. general sherman and staff lay on the
roots of an old oak-tree, that kept them partly clear of mud. the
cold was sharp, my right boot being frozen solid in a puddle in the
morning. about half-past two or three o'clock, general sherman,
with another and myself, crept in as close as possible and
reconnoitred the position. the general managed to creep in much
closer than the rest of us—in fact, so close as to cause us
anxiety. the enemy worked hard all night on their abatis and
intrenchments, and in the morning we found a ditch and parapet
running clear across the point on which the post was situated. this
point was cut by a road from the back country, across which was a
heavy earthwork and a battery. this road was at the extremity of
our left. general mcclernand kept his head-quarters on his boat,
the tigress. he came up in the morning to a place in the woods in
our rear. one of his staff, a cavalry-officer, climbed a tree to
report movements; but from that point there was very little to be
seen. between ten and eleven o'clock the fire opened from the
fleet, and we opened along the whole line from infantry and
field-guns. our men soon worked in close enough to keep down the
fire of the enemy to a very marked degree.
after reporting to general sherman, and while explaining the
position of the fleet, the smoke-stacks and flags appeared above
the fort. what firing was going on in our immediate front ceased. a
good many rebels were in plain sight, running away from the fort
and scattering. while we were still surprised, the cry was raised
that a white flag was hung out. i did not see it, but in a few
minutes saw others along the line, and just as the general started
for the fort i saw the flag not far from the white house, near the
parapet. orders were given to cease firing. captain dayton was sent
to the fort where the first flag was raised. some shots were fired
and some men hurt after this. the first rebel officer we
encountered was colonel or general garland, commanding brigade, who
was ordered to put his men in line and stack arms, which was done.
i was directed to pass along the line to the right, and cause the
prisoners to stack arms and form our men in line, just outside the
work. this i did till i reached deshler's brigade, on our extreme
right, or nearly so, and who was opposed to the right of steele's
force. steele's men had rushed up to the very foot of the parapet,
and some were on it, though they did not fire. the commander of the
enemy (deshler) refused to obey my orders to stack arms, and asked
a good many questions as to "how it happened;" said he was not
whipped, but held us in check, etc. i told him there were eight or
nine thousand men right there, that a shot from me, or a call,
would bring down on him, and that we had entire possession of the
place. after sending two officers from the nearest troops to
explain the condition to steele, and to warn every officer they met
to pass the word for everybody to be on the sharp lookout, i
arranged with deshler to keep quiet until i could bring his own
commander, or orders from him. returning to general sherman, i
found a party of young rebel officers, including robert johnston's
son (rebel senate) and captain wolf, quartermaster, of new orleans,
who declined to surrender except to gentlemen. some german missouri
soldiers didn't relish the distinction, and were about clubbing
them over the head, when i interfered and received their surrender.
hurrying back to the general, i reported the dangerous condition of
things. he and general churchill, commanding officer of the enemy,
started for deshler's brigade; meeting garland, a quarrel and some
recrimination followed between him and churchill, as to where the
fault of the surrender belonged, which was rather promptly silenced
by general sherman, who hurried to the scene of trouble. there,
after some ill-natured talk, deshler ordered his men to lay down
their arms. i rode into the fort, and found the parapet badly torn
up by the fire from the fleet. on going to the embrasure where i
had seen the gun while on the river-bank talking to captain shirk,
the piece was found split back about eighteen inches, and the lower
half of the muzzle dropped out. a battered but unexploded shell
lying with the piece explained that it must have struck the gun in
the muzzle, almost squarely. on passing along the inside i saw from
the torn condition of the earthworks how tremendous our fire was,
and how the fire of the enemy was kept down. the fire of the navy
had partly torn down the side of the fort next the river. a good
many sailors were in the fort. general a. j. smith, admiral porter,
and general burbridge were there—all in high spirits, but in
some contention as to who got in first. toward dark, or nearly so,
an arkansas regiment came in as reenforcements, but surrendered
without any trouble. about the same time general sherman received
orders to put general a. j. smith in charge of the fort, and stay
outside with his men. as his troops were nearly all inside, and had
four-fifths of the prisoners in charge, these orders were not very
clear, and the general left for headquarters to find out what was
meant. i went on collecting arms, and as our men were scattering a
good deal and were greatly excited, i took the precaution to pass
along the line and march the prisoners far enough from the stacked
arms to be out of temptation. i was especially urged to this by
hearing several rebel officers speak of their guns being still
loaded. it was dark before all the prisoners were collected and
under guard, including the regiment that arrived after the fight. i
am confident that all the prisoners were under guard by general
sherman's troops.
everything being secure, the staff-officers, all of whom had been
busily engaged, scattered to compare notes and enjoy the victory. i
found my way onboard the tigress, where every one was greatly
excited, and in high feather regarding our victory, the biggest
thing since donelson. i also obtained some food and small comforts
for a few rebel officers, including young johnston, wolfe, and the
colonel deshler already mentioned. then hunted up general sherman,
whom i found sitting on a cracker-boa in the white house already
mentioned, near where the white flag first appeared. garland was
with him, and slept with him that night, while the rest of us laid
around wherever we could. it was a gloomy, bloody house, and
suggestive of war. garland was blamed by the other confederate
officers for the white flag, and remained with us for safety. next
day was very cold. we worked hard at the lists of
prisoners—nearly five thousand in number—all of whom
were sent to st. louis, in charge of our inspector-general, major
sanger. our loss was less than one hundred. the enemy, although
behind intrenchments, lost more than double what we did. their
wounded were much worse hurt than ours, who were mostly hit around
the head and arms.
the losses were nearly all in general sherman's wing of the army.
the loss in the fleet amounted to little, but their service was
very valuable, and deserved great credit, though they received
little. there was a good deal of sympathy between our part of the
forces and the fleet people, and i then thought, and still think,
if we had been on the left next the river, that in connection with
the tremendous fire from the navy, we could have carried the work
in an hour after we opened on it. their missiles traversed the
whole fortification, clear through to the hospitals at the upper
end, and i stood five minutes in rifle-range of the fort next the
river—not hit, and but seldom shot at, and no one hit near
me.
on the th we embarked, in a snow-storm; collected at napoleon,
which seemed to be washing away; and steamed to milliken's bend,
were we arrived on january st, and soon after went to young's
plantation, near vicksburg.
the above statement from general hammond was received by general
sherman, inclosed in a letter dated "chicago, february , " and
signed "john h. hammond," who was adjutant-general to general
sherman during the winter of -'.
cincinnati, february , 
my dear general: at arkansas post the troops debarked from steamer
january th, from one o'clock to dark, in the vicinity of notrib's
farm, and on the th moved out to get position; steele to the
right, crossing the low ground to the north, to get a higher
ground, avoid crowding the moving columns, and gain the left (our
right) and rear of the "post," and the river-bank above the post.
stuart took the river-road the movement commencing at  o'clock
a.m.. after crossing the low ground covered with water, you were
called back with steele, as stuart had driven out the enemy's
rifle-trench pickets, this giving more and feasible room for
moving. stuart was pushed forward, and by dark he and steele were
well up to their expected positions. before daylight on the th
you directed me to accompany you for a personal inspection of the
ground to your front, which we made on foot, going so far forward
that we could easily hear the enemy at work and moving about.
discovering the open fields, you at once directed steele to move to
the right and front, and pushed stuart out so as to fully command
them and the field-work of the enemy extending from the fort, to
prevent farther strengthening, as it was evident these works were
the product of a recent thought. stuart and steele were prompt in
taking position, but morgan's command (not under your control) did
not seem to work up, or keep in junction with you. at ten o'clock
you sent me to mcclernand to ascertain why the delay of attack. he
attributed it to admiral porter, which was really unjust. the
attack began at  p.m., by admiral porter, and the sound of his
first gun had not died till your men were engaged—wood's,
barrett's, and the parrott batteries and infantry. it was lively
for a time, and stuart pushed clear up to the enemy's
rifle-trenches, and forced them to keep sheltered. hammond was
mostly with steele; sanger sent to mcclernand, and mccoy, myself,
and john taylor were with you and stuart. at about half-past three
i got your permission to go to giles smith's skirmish-line, and,
thinking i saw evidence of the enemy weakening, i hurried back to
you and reported my observations. i was so confident that a demand
for it would bring a surrender, that i asked permission to make it,
and, as you granted me, but refused to let another member of your
staff, at his request, go with me, i rode directly down the road
with only an orderly. colonel garland, commanding a brigade, was
the first officer i saw, to whom, for you, i made the demand. all
firing ceased at once, or in a few moments. i sent the orderly back
to you, and you rode forward. it was then four o'clock.
during the attack, nobody seemed to think mcclernand had any clear
idea of what or how it was to be done. during the day he gave you
no directions, nor came where you were; he was well to the rear,
with his "man up a tree," who in the capacity of a lookout gave
mcclernand information, from which he based such instructions as he
made to his subordinates. he was free to express himself as being a
man of "destiny," and his "star" was in the ascendance. i am,
etc.,
l. m. dayton, late colonel of the staff, now of cincinnati,
ohio.
general w. t. sherman.
[special field orders, no. .]
memphis, january , 
v. the expedition is one of celerity, and all things must tend to
that. corps commanders and staff-officers will see that our
movements are not encumbered by wheeled vehicles improperly loaded.
not a tent, from the commander-in-chief down, will be carried. the
sick will be left behind, and the surgeons can find houses and
sheds for all hospital purposes.
vi. all the cavalry in this department is placed under the orders
and command of brigadier-general w. s. smith, who will receive
special instructions.
by order of major-general w. t. sherman
l. m. dayton, aide-de-camp.
note.-that same evening i started in a steamboat for
vicksburg.
st. louis, .
memphis, january , 
brigadier-general w. s. smith, commanding cavalry, etc.,
present.
dear general: by an order issued this day i have placed all the
cavalry of this department subject to your command. i estimate you
can make a force of full seven thousand men, which i believe to be
superior and better in all respects than the combined cavalry which
the enemy has in all the state of mississippi. i will in person
start for vicksburg to-day, and with four divisions of infantry,
artillery, and cavalry move out for jackson, brandon, and meridian,
aiming to reach the latter place by february th. general banks
will feign on pascagoula and general logan on rome. i want you with
your cavalry to move from colliersville on pontotoc and okolona;
thence sweeping down near the mobile & ohio railroad, disable
that road as much as possible, consume or destroy the resources of
the enemy along that road, break up the connection with columbus,
mississippi, and finally reach me at or near meridian as near the
date i have mentioned as possible. this will call for great energy
of action on your part, but i believe you are equal to it, and you
have the best and most experienced troops in the service, and they
will do anything that is possible. general grierson is with you,
and is familiar with the whole country. i will send up from
haines's bluff an expedition of gunboats and transports combined,
to feel up the yazoo as far as the present water will permit. this
will disconcert the enemy. my movement on jackson will also divide
the enemy, so that by no combination can he reach you with but a
part of his force. i wish you to attack any force of cavalry you
meet and follow them southward, but in no event be drawn into the
forks of the streams that make up the yazoo nor over into alabama.
do not let the enemy draw you into minor affairs, but look solely
to the greater object to destroy his communication from okolona to
meridian, and thence eastward to selma. from okolona south you will
find abundance of forage collected along the railroad, and the
farmers have corn standing in the fields. take liberally of all
these, as well as horses, mules, cattle, etc. as a rule, respect
dwellings and families as something too sacred to be disturbed by
soldiers, but mills, barns, sheds, stables, and such like things
use for the benefit or convenience of your command. if convenient,
send into columbus, mississippi, and destroy all machinery there,
and the bridge across the tombigbee, which enables the enemy to
draw the resources of the east side of the valley, but this is not
of sufficient importance to delay your movement. try and
communicate with me by scouts and spies from the time you reach
pontotoc. avoid any large force of infantry, leaving them to me. we
have talked over this matter so much that the above covers all
points not provided for in my published orders of to-day. i am,
etc.,
w. t. sherman, mayor-general, commanding.
memphis, tennessee, january , .
brigadier-general j. p. hatch, in charge of cavalry bureau, st.
louis, missouri.
sir: your favor of the st inst. is just received. up to the
present time eight hundred and eighteen horses have arrived here
since captain hudson's visit to st. louis. i wrote you upon his
return several days ago that it would not be necessary to divert
shipments to this point which could not reach us before february
st. we shall certainly get off on our contemplated expedition
before that time. the number of horses estimated for in this
department by its chief quartermaster was two thousand, and this
number, including those already sent, will, i think, completely
mount all the dismounted cavalry of this department. recruits for
cavalry regiments are arriving freely, and this will swell our
requisitions for a couple of months to come. i will as far as
possible procure horses from the regions of country traversed by
our cavalry.
yours truly, w. sooy smith, brigadier-general,
chief of cavalry, military division of the mississippi.
memphis, tennessee, january , 
brigadier-general george crook, commanding second cavalry division,
huntsville, alabama.
i start in about three days with seven, thousand men to meridian
via pontotoc. demonstrate on decatur, to hold roddy.
w. sooy smith, brigadier-general, chief of cavalry, military
division of the mississippi.
maywood, illinois, july ,
general w. t. sherman, commander-in-chief, united states
army.
sir: your letter of july th is just received.
your entire statement in the "memoirs" concerning my part in the
meridian campaign is incorrect.
you overstate my strength, placing it at seven thousand effective,
when it was but six. the nominal strength of my command was seven
thousand.
you understate the strength of my enemy, putting forrest's force at
four thousand. on our return to nashville, you stated it, in
general grant's presence, to have been but twenty-five hundred.
before and during my movement i positively knew forrest's strength
to be full six thousand, and he has since told me so himself.
instead of delaying from the st to the th of february for "some
regiment that was ice-bound near columbus, kentucky," it was an
entire brigade, colonel waring's, without which your orders to me
were peremptory not to move. i asked you if i should wait its
arrival, and you answered: "certainly; if you go without it, you
will be, too weak, and i want you strong enough to go where you
please."
the time set for our arrival at meridian, the th of february, had
arrived before it was possible for me, under your orders, to move
from memphis, and i would have been entirely justifiable if i had
not started at all. but i was at that time, and at all times during
the war, as earnest and anxious to carry out my orders, and do my
full duty as you or any other officer could be, and i set out to
make a march of two hundred and fifty miles into the confederacy,
having to drive back a rebel force equal to my own. after the time
had arrived for the full completion of my movement, i drove this
force before me, and penetrated one hundred and sixty miles into
the confederacy—did more hard fighting, and killed, wounded,
and captured more of the enemy than you did during the
campaign—did my work most thoroughly, as far as i could go
without encountering the rebel cavalry set loose by your return
from meridian, and brought off my command, with all the captured
property and rescued negroes, with very small loss, considering
that inflicted on the enemy, and the long-continued and very severe
fighting. if i had disobeyed your orders, and started without
waring's brigade, i would have been "too weak," would probably have
been defeated, and would have been subjected to just censure.
having awaited its arrival, as i was positively and distinctly
ordered to do, it only remained for me to start upon its arrival,
and accomplish all that i could of the work allotted to me. to have
attempted to penetrate farther into the enemy's country, with the
cavalry of polk's army coming up to reenforce forrest, would have
insured the destruction of my entire command, situated as it was. i
cannot now go into all the particulars, though i assure you that
they make the proof of the correctness of my conduct as conclusive
as i could desire it to be. i was not headed off and defeated by an
inferior force near west point. we had the fighting all our own way
near west point, and at all other points except at okalona, on our
return, when we had the worst of it for a little while, but finally
checked the enemy handsomely, and continued our return march,
fighting at the rear and on both flanks, repulsing all attacks and
moving in perfect order. and so my movement was not a failure,
except that i did not reach meridian as intended, for the reason
stated, and for many more which it is not necessary for me to
detail here. on the other hand, it was a very decided success,
inflicting a terrible destruction of supplies of every kind, and a
heavy loss of men upon the enemy. you should have so reported it in
the beginning. you should so amend your report, and "memoirs" now.
this, and no less than this, is due from one soldier to another. it
is due to the exalted position which you occupy, and, above all, it
is due to that truthfulness in history which you claim to revere.
if you desire it, i will endeavor to visit you, and in a friendly
manner "fight our battles o'er again," and endeavor to convince you
that you have always been mistaken as to the manner in which my
part in the "meridian campaign" was performed. but i will never
rest until the wrong statements regarding it are fully and fairly
corrected. yours truly,
st. louis, missouri, july , .
general j. d. webster, chicago, illinois
dear general: general w. sooy smith feels aggrieved and wronged by
my account of his part in the meridian campaign, in my "memoirs,"
pages , , and properly appeals to me for correction. i have
offered to modify any words or form of expression that he may point
out, but he asks me to completely change the whole that concerns
him. this, of course, i will not do, as his part was material to
the whole, and cannot be omitted or materially altered without
changing the remainder, for his failure to reach meridian by
february th was the reason for other movements distant from him.
i now offer him, what seems to me fair and liberal, that we submit
the points at issue to you as arbitrator. you are familiar with the
ground, the coincident history, and most, if not all, the
parties.
i propose to supply you with
. copy of my orders placing all the cavalry under general smith's
orders (with returns).
. my letter of instructions to him of january th.
. my official report of the campaign, dated vicksburg, march ,
. general w. sooy smith's report of his operations, dated
nashville, tennessee, march , .
after reading these, i further propose that you address us
questions which we will answer in writing, when you are to make us
a concise, written decision, which i will have published in close
connection with the subject in controversy. if general smith will
show you my letter to him of this date, and also deliver this with
his written assent, i will promptly furnish you the above
documents, and also procure from the official files a return of the
cavalry force available at and near memphis on the date of my
orders, viz., january , .
with great respect, your friend and servant,
w. t. sherman, general.
note:—general smith never submitted his case to the
arbitration offered. the whole will be made clear by the
publication of the official records, which are already in print,
though not yet issued. his orders were in writing, and i have no
recollection of the "peremptory" verbal orders to which he refers,
and quotes as from me.
st. louis, missouri, . w. t. s.
maywood, illinois, july , .
general w. t. sherman, commander-in-chief, etc.
dear general: your letter of the th of july reaches me just as i
am starting to spend the first vacation i have ever allowed myself
—in the territories, with my wife and son.
it indicates a spirit of fairness from which we have better things
than an arbitration to hope for. though, if we should reach such a
necessity, there is no one living to whom our differences might
more properly be referred than to general webster. i make no
objection to your writing your "memoirs," and, as long as they
refer to your own conduct, you are at liberty to write them as you
like; but, when they refer to mine, and deal unjustly with my
reputation, i, of right, object.
neither do i wish to write my "memoirs," unless compelled to do so
to vindicate my good name. there were certain commands which were
to make up mine. these, waring's brigade included, were spoken of
by us in the long conversation to which you refer. this brigade we
knew was having a hard time of it in its movement from columbus to
memphis. i asked you if i should move without it if it did not
arrive, and you answered me as stated in my last letter to you.
those who immediately surrounded me during the painful delay that
occurred will inform you how sorely i chafed under the restraint of
that peremptory order.
in the conversation that occurred between us at nashville, while
all the orders, written and verbal, were still fresh in your
memory, you did not censure me for waiting for waring, but for
allowing myself to be encumbered with fugitive negroes to such an
extent that my command was measurably unfit for active movement or
easy handling, and for turning back from west point, instead of
pressing on toward meridian. invitations had been industriously
circulated, by printed circulars and otherwise, to the negroes to
come into our lines, and to seek our protection wherever they could
find it, and i considered ourselves pledged to receive and protect
them. your censure for so doing, and your remarks on that subject
to me in nashville, are still fresh in my memory, and of a
character which you would now doubtless gladly disavow.
but we must meet and talk the whole matter over, and i will be at
any trouble to see you when i return.
meantime i will not let go the hope that i will convince you
absolutely of your error, for the facts are entirely on my side.
yours truly,
on the th day of march, , at nashville, tennessee, i
relieved lieutenant-general grant in command of the military
division of the mississippi, embracing the departments of the ohio,
cumberland, tennessee, and arkansas, commanded respectively by
major-generals schofield, thomas, mcpherson, and steele. general
grant was in the act of starting east to assume command of all the
armies of the united states, but more particularly to give
direction in person to the armies of the potomac and james,
operating against richmond; and i accompanied him as far as
cincinnati on his way, to avail myself of the opportunity to
discuss privately many little details incident to the contemplated
changes, and of preparation for the great events then impending.
among these was the intended assignment to duty of many officers of
note and influence, who had, by the force of events, drifted into
inactivity and discontent. among these stood prominent generals
mcclellan, burnside, and fremont, in, the east; and generals buell,
mccook, negley, and crittenden, at the west. my understanding was
that general grant thought it wise and prudent to give all these
officers appropriate commands, that would enable them to regain the
influence they had lost; and, as a general reorganization of all
the armies was then necessary, he directed me to keep in mind
especially the claims of generals buell, mccook, and crittenden,
and endeavor to give them commands that would be as near their rank
and dates of commission as possible; but i was to do nothing until
i heard further from him on the subject, as he explained that he
would have to consult the secretary of war before making final
orders. general buell and his officers had been subjected to a long
ordeal by a court of inquiry, touching their conduct of the
campaign in tennessee and kentucky, that resulted in the battle of
perryville, or chaplin's hills, october ,, and they had been
substantially acquitted; and, as it was manifest that we were to
have some hard fighting, we were anxious to bring into harmony
every man and every officer of skill in the profession of arms. of
these, generals buell and mcclellan were prominent in rank, and
also by reason of their fame acquired in mexico, as well as in the
earlier part of the civil war.
after my return to nashville i addressed myself to the task of
organization and preparation, which involved the general security
of the vast region of the south which had been already conquered,
more especially the several routes of supply and communication with
the active armies at the front, and to organize a large army to
move into georgia, coincident with the advance of the eastern
armies against richmond. i soon received from colonel j. b.
fry—now of the adjutant-general's department, but then at
washington in charge of the provost-marshal-general's
office—a letter asking me to do something for general buell.
i answered him frankly, telling him of my understanding with
general grant, and that i was still awaiting the expected order of
the war department, assigning general buell to my command. colonel
fry, as general buell's special friend, replied that he was very
anxious that i should make specific application for the services of
general buell by name, and inquired what i proposed to offer him.
to this i answered that, after the agreement with general grant
that he would notify me from washington, i could not with propriety
press the matter, but if general buell should be assigned to me
specifically i was prepared to assign him to command all the troops
on the mississippi river from cairo to natchez, comprising about
three divisions, or the equivalent of a corps d'armee. general
grant never afterward communicated to me on the subject at all; and
i inferred that mr. stanton, who was notoriously vindictive in his
prejudices, would not consent to the employment of these high
officers. general buell, toward the close of the war, published a
bitter political letter, aimed at general grant, reflecting on his
general management of the war, and stated that both generals canby
and sherman had offered him a subordinate command, which he had
declined because he had once outranked us. this was not true as to
me, or canby either, i think, for both general canby and i ranked
him at west point and in the old army, and he (general buell) was
only superior to us in the date of his commission as major-general,
for a short period in . this newspaper communication, though
aimed at general grant, reacted on himself, for it closed his
military career. general crittenden afterward obtained authority
for service, and i offered him a division, but he declined it for
the reason, as i understood it, that he had at one time commanded a
corps. he is now in the united states service, commanding the
seventeenth infantry. general mccook obtained a command under
general canby, in the department of the gulf, where he rendered
good service, and he is also in the regular service,
lieutenant-colonel tenth infantry.
i returned to nashville from cincinnati about the th of march,
and started at once, in a special car attached to the regular
train, to inspect my command at the front, going to pulaski,
tennessee, where i found general g. m. dodge; thence to huntsville,
alabama, where i had left a part of my personal staff and the
records of the department during the time we had been absent at
meridian; and there i found general mcpherson, who had arrived from
vicksburg, and had assumed command of the army of the tennessee.
general mcpherson accompanied me, and we proceeded by the cars to
stevenson, bridgeport, etc., to chattanooga, where we spent a day
or two with general george h. thomas, and then continued on to
knoxville, where was general schofield. he returned with us to
chattanooga, stopping by the way a few hours at loudon, where were
the headquarters of the fourth corps (major-general gordon
granger). general granger, as usual, was full of complaints at the
treatment of his corps since i had left him with general burnside,
at knoxville, the preceding november; and he stated to me
personally that he had a leave of absence in his pocket, of which
he intended to take advantage very soon. about the end of march,
therefore, the three army commanders and myself were together at
chattanooga. we had nothing like a council of war, but conversed
freely and frankly on all matters of interest then in progress or
impending. we all knew that, as soon as the spring was fairly open,
we should have to move directly against our antagonist, general
jos. e. johnston, then securely intrenched at dalton, thirty miles
distant; and the purpose of our conference at the time was to
ascertain our own resources, and to distribute to each part of the
army its appropriate share of work. we discussed every possible
contingency likely to arise, and i simply instructed each army
commander to make immediate preparations for a hard campaign,
regulating the distribution of supplies that were coming up by rail
from nashville as equitably as possible. we also agreed on some
subordinate changes in the organization of the three separate
armies which were destined to take the field; among which was the
consolidation of the eleventh and twelfth corps (howard and slocum)
into a single corps, to be commanded by general jos. hooker.
general howard was to be transferred to the fourth corps, vice
gordon granger to avail himself of his leave of absence; and
general slocum was to be ordered down the mississippi river, to
command the district of vicksburg. these changes required the
consent of the president, and were all in due time approved.
the great question of the campaign was one of supplies.
nashville, our chief depot, was itself partially in a hostile
country, and even the routes of supply from louisville to nashville
by rail, and by way of the cumberland river, had to be guarded.
chattanooga (our starting-point) was one hundred and thirty-six
miles in front of nashville, and every foot of the way, especially
the many bridges, trestles, and culverts, had to be strongly
guarded against the acts of a local hostile population and of the
enemy's cavalry. then, of course, as we advanced into georgia, it
was manifest that we should have to repair the railroad, use it,
and guard it likewise: general thomas's army was much the largest
of the three, was best provided, and contained the best corps of
engineers, railroad managers, and repair parties, as well as the
best body of spies and provost-marshals. on him we were therefore
compelled in a great measure to rely for these most useful branches
of service. he had so long exercised absolute command and control
over the railroads in his department, that the other armies were
jealous, and these thought the army of the cumberland got the
lion's share of the supplies and other advantages of the railroads.
i found a good deal of feeling in the army of the tennessee on this
score, and therefore took supreme control of the roads myself,
placed all the army commanders on an equal footing, and gave to
each the same control, so far as orders of transportation for men
and stores were concerned. thomas's spies brought him frequent and
accurate reports of jos. e. johnston's army at dalton, giving its
strength anywhere between forty and fifty thousand men, and these
were being reenforced by troops from mississippi, and by the
georgia militia, under general g. w. smith. general johnston seemed
to be acting purely on the defensive, so that we had time and
leisure to take all our measures deliberately and fully. i fixed
the date of may st, when all things should be in readiness for the
grand forward movement, and then returned to nashville; general
schofield going back to knoxville, and mcpherson to huntsville,
thomas remaining at chattanooga.
on the d of april, at nashville, i wrote to general grant, then
at washington, reporting to him the results of my visit to the
several armies, and asked his consent to the several changes
proposed, which was promptly given by telegraph. i then addressed
myself specially to the troublesome question of transportation and
supplies. i found the capacity of the railroads from nashville
forward to decatur, and to chattanooga, so small, especially in the
number of locomotives and care, that it was clear that they were
barely able to supply the daily wants of the armies then dependent
on them, with no power of accumulating a surplus in advance. the
cars were daily loaded down with men returning from furlough, with
cattle, horses, etc.; and, by reason of the previous desolation of
the country between chattanooga and knoxville, general thomas had
authorized the issue of provisions to the suffering
inhabitants.
we could not attempt an advance into georgia without food,
ammunition, etc.; and ordinary prudence dictated that we should
have an accumulation at the front, in case of interruption to the
railway by the act of the enemy, or by common accident.
accordingly, on the th of april, i issued a general order,
limiting the use of the railroad-cars to transporting only the
essential articles of food, ammunition, and supplies for the army
proper, forbidding any further issues to citizens, and cutting off
all civil traffic; requiring the commanders of posts within thirty
miles of nashville to haul out their own stores in wagons;
requiring all troops destined for the front to march, and all
beef-cattle to be driven on their own legs. this was a great help,
but of course it naturally raised a howl. some of the poor union
people of east tennessee appealed to president lincoln, whose kind
heart responded promptly to their request. he telegraphed me to
know if i could not modify or repeal my orders; but i answered him
that a great campaign was impending, on which the fate of the
nation hung; that our railroads had but a limited capacity, and
could not provide for the necessities of the army and of the people
too; that one or the other must quit, and we could not until the
army of jos. johnston was conquered, etc., etc. mr. lincoln seemed
to acquiesce, and i advised the people to obtain and drive out
cattle from kentucky, and to haul out their supplies by the
wagon-road from the same quarter, by way of cumberland gap. by
these changes we nearly or quite doubled our daily accumulation of
stores at the front, and yet even this was not found enough.
i accordingly called together in nashville the master of
transportation, colonel anderson, the chief quartermaster, general
j. l. donaldson, and the chief commissary, general amos beckwith,
for conference. i assumed the strength of the army to move from
chattanooga into georgia at one hundred thousand men, and the
number of animals to be fed, both for cavalry and draught, at
thirty-five thousand; then, allowing for occasional wrecks of
trains, which were very common, and for the interruption of the
road itself by guerrillas and regular raids, we estimated it would
require one hundred and thirty cars, of ten tons each, to reach
chattanooga daily, to be reasonably certain of an adequate supply.
even with this calculation, we could not afford to bring forward
hay for the horses and mules, nor more than five pounds of oats or
corn per day for each animal. i was willing to risk the question of
forage in part, because i expected to find wheat and corn fields,
and a good deal of grass, as we advanced into georgia at that
season of the year. the problem then was to deliver at chattanooga
and beyond one hundred and thirty car-loads daily, leaving the
beef-cattle to be driven on the hoof, and all the troops in excess
of the usual train-guards to march by the ordinary roads. colonel
anderson promptly explained that he did not possess cars or
locomotives enough to do this work. i then instructed and
authorized him to hold on to all trains that arrived at nashville
from louisville, and to allow none to go back until he had secured
enough to fill the requirements of our problem. at the time he only
had about sixty serviceable locomotives, and about six hundred cars
of all kinds, and he represented that to provide for all
contingencies he must have at least one hundred locomotives and one
thousand cars. as soon as mr. guthrie, the president of the
louisville & nashville railroad, detected that we were holding
on to all his locomotives and cars, he wrote me, earnestly
remonstrating against it, saying that he would not be able with
diminished stock to bring forward the necessary stores from
louisville to nashville. i wrote to him, frankly telling him
exactly how we were placed, appealed to his patriotism to stand by
us, and advised him in like manner to hold on to all trains coming
into jeffersonville, indiana. he and general robert allen, then
quartermaster-general at louisville, arranged a ferry-boat so as to
transfer the trains over the ohio river from jeffersonville, and in
a short time we had cars and locomotives from almost every road at
the north; months afterward i was amused to see, away down in
georgia, cars marked "pittsburg & fort wayne," "delaware &
lackawanna," "baltimore & ohio," and indeed with the names of
almost every railroad north of the ohio river. how these railroad
companies ever recovered their property, or settled their
transportation accounts, i have never heard, but to this fact, as
much as to any other single fact, i attribute the perfect success
which afterward attended our campaigns; and i have always felt
grateful to mr. guthrie, of louisville, who had sense enough and
patriotism enough to subordinate the interests of his railroad
company to the cause of his country.
about this time, viz., the early part of april, i was much
disturbed by a bold raid made by the rebel general forrest up
between the mississippi and tennessee rivers. he reached the ohio
river at paducah, but was handsomely repulsed by colonel hicks. he
then swung down toward memphis, assaulted and carried fort pillow,
massacring a part of its garrison, composed wholly of negro troops.
at first i discredited the story of the massacre, because, in
preparing for the meridian campaign, i had ordered fort pillow to
be evacuated, but it transpired afterward that general hurlbut had
retained a small garrison at fort pillow to encourage the
enlistment of the blacks as soldiers, which was a favorite
political policy at that day. the massacre at fort pillow occurred
april , , and has been the subject of congressional inquiry.
no doubt forrest's men acted like a set of barbarians, shooting
down the helpless negro garrison after the fort was in their
possession; but i am told that forrest personally disclaims any
active participation in the assault, and that he stopped the firing
as soon as he could. i also take it for granted that forrest did
not lead the assault in person, and consequently that he was to the
rear, out of sight if not of hearing at the time, and i was told by
hundreds of our men, who were at various times prisoners in
forrest's possession, that he was usually very kind to them. he had
a desperate set of fellows under him, and at that very time there
is no doubt the feeling of the southern people was fearfully savage
on this very point of our making soldiers out of their late slaves,
and forrest may have shared the feeling.
i also had another serious cause of disturbance about that time.
i wanted badly the two divisions of troops which had been loaned to
general banks in the month of march previously, with the express
understanding that their absence was to endure only one month, and
that during april they were to come out of red river, and be again
within the sphere of my command. i accordingly instructed one of my
inspector-generals, john m. corse, to take a fleet steamboat at
nashville, proceed via cairo, memphis, and vicksburg, to general
banks up the red river, and to deliver the following letter of
april d, as also others, of like tenor, to generals a. j. smith
and fred steele, who were supposed to be with him:
nashville, tennessee, april , 
major-general n. p. banks, commanding department of the gulf, red
river.
general: the thirty days for which i loaned you the command of
general a. j. smith will expire on the th instant. i send with
this brigadier-general j. m. corse, to carry orders to general a.
j. smith, and to give directions for a new movement, which is
preliminary to the general campaign. general corse may see you and
explain in full, but, lest he should not find you in person, i will
simply state that forrest, availing himself of the absence of our
furloughed men and of the detachment with you, has pushed up
between the mississippi and tennessee rivers, even to the ohio. he
attacked paducah, but got the worst of it, and he still lingers
about the place. i hope that he will remain thereabouts till
general a. j. smith can reach his destined point, but this i can
hardly expect; yet i want him to reach by the yazoo a position near
grenada, thence to operate against forrest, after which to march
across to decatur, alabama. you will see that he has a big job, and
therefore should start at once. from all that i can learn, my
troops reached alexandria, louisiana, at the time agreed on, viz.,
march th, and i hear of them at natchitoches, but cannot hear of
your troops being above opelousas.
steele is also moving. i leave steele's entire force to cooperate
with you and the navy, but, as i before stated, i must have a. t.
smith's troops now as soon as possible.
i beg you will expedite their return to vicksburg, if they have not
already started, and i want them if possible to remain in the same
boats they have used up red river, as it will save the time
otherwise consumed in transfer to other boats.
all is well in this quarter, and i hope by the time you turn
against mobile our forces will again act toward the same end,
though from distant points. general grant, now having lawful
control, will doubtless see that all minor objects are disregarded,
and that all the armies act on a common plan.
hoping, when this reaches you, that you will be in possession of
shreveport, i am, with great respect, etc.,
w. t. sherman, major-general commanding.
rumors were reaching us thick and fast of defeat and disaster in
that quarter; and i feared then, what afterward actually happened,
that neither general banks nor admiral porter could or would spare
those two divisions. on the d of april, general corse returned,
bringing full answers to my letters, and i saw that we must go on
without them. this was a serious loss to the army of the tennessee,
which was also short by two other divisions that were on their
veteran furlough, and were under orders to rendezvous at cairo,
before embarking for clifton, on the tennessee river.
on the th of april, , the headquarters of the three armies
of the cumberland, tennessee, and ohio, were at chattanooga.,
huntsville, and knoxville, and the tables on page , et seq., give
their exact condition and strength.
the department of the arkansas was then subject to my command,
but general fred steele, its commander, was at little rock, remote
from me, acting in cooperation with general banks, and had full
employment for every soldier of his command; so that i never
depended on him for any men, or for any participation in the
georgia campaign. soon after, viz., may th, that department was
transferred to the military division of "the gulf," or "southwest,"
major-general e. r. s. canby commanding, and general steele served
with him in the subsequent movement against mobile.
in generals thomas, mcpherson, and schofield, i had three
generals of education and experience, admirably qualified for the
work before us. each has made a history of his own, and i need not
here dwell on their respective merits as men, or as commanders of
armies, except that each possessed special qualities of mind and of
character which fitted them in the highest degree for the work then
in contemplation.
by the returns of april , , it will be seen that the army
of the cumberland had on its muster-rolls—
men
present and absent
present for duty
the army of the tennessee
present and absent
present for duty
the army of the ohio
present and absent
present for duty
the department and army commanders had to maintain strong
garrisons in their respective departments, and also to guard their
respective lines of supply. i therefore, in my mind, aimed to
prepare out of these three armies, by the st of may, , a
compact army for active operations in georgia, of about the
following numbers:
army of the cumberland 
army of the tennessee
army of the ohio
total
and, to make these troops as mobile as possible, i made the
strictest possible orders in relation to wagons and all species of
incumbrances and impedimenta whatever. each officer and soldier was
required to carry on his horse or person food and clothing enough
for five days. to each regiment was allowed but one wagon and one
ambulance, and to the officers of each company one pack horse or
mule.
each division and brigade was provided a fair proportion of
wagons for a supply train, and these were limited in their loads to
carry food, ammunition, and clothing. tents were forbidden to all
save the sick and wounded, and one tent only was allowed to each
headquarters for use as an office. these orders were not absolutely
enforced, though in person i set the example, and did not have a
tent, nor did any officer about me have one; but we had wall
tent-flies, without poles, and no tent-furniture of any kind. we
usually spread our flies over saplings, or on fence-rails or posts
improvised on the spot. most of the general officers, except
thomas, followed my example strictly; but he had a regular
headquarters-camp. i frequently called his attention to the orders
on this subject, rather jestingly than seriously. he would break
out against his officers for having such luxuries, but, needing a
tent himself, and being good-natured and slow to act, he never
enforced my orders perfectly. in addition to his regular
wagon-train, he had a big wagon which could be converted into an
office, and this we used to call "thomas's circus." several times
during the campaign i found quartermasters hid away in some
comfortable nook to the rear, with tents and mess-fixtures which
were the envy of the passing soldiers; and i frequently broke them
up, and distributed the tents to the surgeons of brigades. yet my
orders actually reduced the transportation, so that i doubt if any
army ever went forth to battle with fewer impedimenta, and where
the regular and necessary supplies of food, ammunition, and
clothing, were issued, as called for, so regularly and so well.
my personal staff was then composed of captain j. c. mccoy,
aide-de-camp; captain l. m. dayton, aide-de-camp; captain j. c.
audenried, aide-de-camp; brigadier-general j. d. webster, chief of
staff; major r. m. sawyer, assistant adjutant-general; captain
montgomery rochester, assistant adjutant-general. these last three
were left at nashville in charge of the office, and were empowered
to give orders in my name, communication being generally kept up by
telegraph.
subsequently were added to my staff, and accompanied me in the
field, brigadier-general w. f. barry, chief of artillery; colonel
o. m. poe, chief of engineers; colonel l. c. easton, chief
quartermaster; colonel amos beckwith, chief commissary; captain
thos. g. baylor, chief of ordnance; surgeon e. d. kittoe, medical
director; brigadier-general j. m. corse, inspector-general;
lieutenant-colonel c. ewing, inspector-general; and
lieutenant-colonel willard warner, inspector-general.
these officers constituted my staff proper at the beginning of
the campaign, which remained substantially the same till the close
of the war, with very few exceptions; viz.: surgeon john moore,
united states army, relieved surgeon kittoe of the volunteers
(about atlanta) as medical director; major henry hitchcock joined
as judge-advocate, and captain g. ward nichols reported as an extra
aide-de-camp (after the fall of atlanta) at gaylesville, just
before we started for savannah.
during the whole month of april the preparations for active war
were going on with extreme vigor, and my letter-book shows an
active correspondence with generals grant, halleck, thomas,
mcpherson, and schofield on thousands of matters of detail and
arrangement, most of which are embraced in my testimony before the
committee on the conduct of the war, vol. i., appendix.
when the time for action approached, viz., may ,, the
actual armies prepared to move into georgia resulted as follows,
present for battle:
men
army of the cumberland, major-general thomas
infantry
artillery
cavalry
aggregate
number of field-guns,
army of the tennessee, major-general mcpherson
infantry
artillery
cavalry
aggregate
guns,
army of the ohio, major-general schofield
infantry
artillery
cavalry
aggregate
guns,
grand aggregate
, men and  guns
these figures do not embrace the cavalry divisions which were
still incomplete, viz., of general stoneman, at lexington,
kentucky, and of general garrard, at columbia, tennessee, who were
then rapidly collecting horses, and joined us in the early stage of
the campaign. general stoneman, having a division of about four
thousand men and horses, was attached to schofield's army of the
ohio. general garrard's division, of about four thousand five
hundred men and horses, was attached to general thomas's command;
and he had another irregular division of cavalry, commanded by
brigadier-general e. mccook. there was also a small brigade of
cavalry, belonging to the army of the cumberland, attached
temporarily to the army of the tennessee, which was commanded by
brigadier-general judson kilpatrick. these cavalry commands changed
constantly in strength and numbers, and were generally used on the
extreme flanks, or for some special detached service, as will be
herein-after related. the army of the tennessee was still short by
the two divisions detached with general banks, up red river, and
two other divisions on furlough in illinois, indiana, and ohio, but
which were rendezvousing at cairo, under generals leggett and
crocker, to form a part of the seventeenth corps, which corps was
to be commanded by major-general frank p. blair, then a member of
congress, in washington. on the d of april i notified him by
letter that i wanted him to join and to command these two
divisions, which ought to be ready by the st of may. general
blair, with these two divisions, constituting the seventeenth army
corps, did not actually overtake us until we reached acworth and
big shanty, in georgia, about the th of june, .
in my letter of april th to general john a. rawains, chief of
staff to general grant at washington, i described at length all the
preparations that were in progress for the active campaign thus
contemplated, and therein estimated schofield at twelve thousand,
thomas at forty-five thousand, and mcpherson at thirty thousand. at
first i intended to open the campaign about may st, by moving
schofield on dalton from cleveland, thomas on the same objective
from chattanooga, and mcpherson on rome and kingston from gunter's
landing. my intention was merely to threaten dalton in front, and
to direct mcpherson to act vigorously against the railroad below
resaca, far to the rear of the enemy. but by reason of his being
short of his estimated strength by the four divisions before
referred to, and thus being reduced to about twenty-four thousand
men, i did not feel justified in placing him so far away from the
support of the main body of the army, and therefore subsequently
changed the plan of campaign, so far as to bring that army up to
chattanooga, and to direct it thence through ship's gap against the
railroad to johnston's rear, at or near resaca, distant from dalton
only eighteen miles, and in full communication with the other
armies by roads behind rocky face ridge, of about the same
length.
on the th of april i received general grant's letter of april
th from washington, which formed the basis of all the campaigns of
the year , and subsequently received another of april th,
written from culpepper, virginia, both of which are now in my
possession, in his own handwriting, and are here given entire.
these letters embrace substantially all the orders he ever made on
this particular subject, and these, it will be seen, devolved on me
the details both as to the plan and execution of the campaign by
the armies under my immediate command. these armies were to be
directed against the rebel army commanded by general joseph e.
johnston, then lying on the defensive, strongly intrenched at
dalton, georgia; and i was required to follow it up closely and
persistently, so that in no event could any part be detached to
assist general lee in virginia; general grant undertaking in like
manner to keep lee so busy that he could not respond to any calls
of help by johnston. neither atlanta, nor augusta, nor savannah,
was the objective, but the "army of jos. johnston," go where it
might.
headquarters armies of the united states washington d. c., april ,
major-general w. t. sherman, commanding military division of the
mississippi.
general: it is my design, if the enemy keep quiet and allow me to
take the initiative in the spring campaign, to work all parts of
the army together, and somewhat toward a common centre. for your
information i now write you my programme, as at present determined
upon.
i have sent orders to banks, by private messenger, to finish up his
present expedition against shreveport with all dispatch; to turn
over the defense of red river to general steels and the navy, and
to return your troops to you, and his own to new orleans; to
abandon all of texas, except the rio grande, and to hold that with
not to exceed four thousand men; to reduce the number of troops on
the mississippi to the lowest number necessary to hold it, and to
collect from his command not less than twenty-five thousand men. to
this i will add five thousand from missouri. with this force he is
to commence operations against mobile as soon as he can. it will be
impossible for him to commence too early.
gillmore joins butler with ten thousand men, and the two operate
against richmond from the south aide of james river. this will give
butler thirty-three thousand men to operate with, w. f. smith
commanding the right wing of his forces, and gillmore the left
wing. i will stay with the army of the potomac, increased by
burnside's corps of not less than twenty-five thousand effective
men, and operate directly against lee's army, wherever it may be
found.
sigel collects all his available force in two columns, one, under
ord and averill, to start from beverly, virginia, and the other,
under crook, to start from charleston, on the kanawha, to move
against the virginia & tennessee railroad.
crook will have all cavalry, and will endeavor to get in about
saltville, and move east from there to join ord. his force will be
all cavalry, while ord will have from ten to twelve thousand men of
all arms.
you i propose to move against johnston's army, to break it up, and
to get into the interior of the enemy's country as far as you can,
inflicting all the damage you can against their war
resources.
i do not propose to lay down for you a plan of campaign, but simply
to lay down the work it is desirable to have done, and leave you
free to execute it in your own way. submit to me, however, as early
as you can, your plan of operations.
as stated, banks is ordered to commence operations as soon as he
can. gillmore is ordered to report at fortress monroe by the th
inst., or as soon thereafter as practicable. sigel is concentrating
now. none will move from their places of rendezvous until i direct,
except banks. i want to be ready to move by the th inst., if
possible; but all i can now direct is that you get ready as soon as
possible. i know you will have difficulties to encounter in getting
through the mountains to where supplies are abundant, but i believe
you will accomplish it.
from the expedition from the department of west virginia i do not
calculate on very great results; but it is the only way i can take
troops from there. with the long line of railroad sigel has to
protect, he can spare no troops, except to move directly to his
front. in this way he must get through to inflict great damage on
the enemy, or the enemy must detach from one of his armies a large
force to prevent it. in other words, if sigel can't skin himself,
he can hold a leg while some one else skins.
i am, general, very respectfully, your obedient servant, u. s.
grant, lieutenant-general.
tennessee, april , 
lieutenant-general u. s. grant, commander-in-chief, washington,
dear general: your two letters of april th are now before me, and
afford me infinite satisfaction. that we are now all to act on a
common plan, converging on a common centre, looks like enlightened
war.
like yourself, you take the biggest load, and from me you shall
have thorough and hearty cooperation. i will not let side issues
draw me off from your main plans in which i am to knock jos.
johnston, and to do as much damage to the resources of the enemy as
possible. i have heretofore written to general rawlins and to
colonel comstock (of your staff) somewhat of the method in which i
propose to act. i have seen all my army, corps, and division
commanders, and have signified only to the former, viz., schofield,
thomas, and mcpherson, our general plans, which i inferred from the
purport of our conversation here and at cincinnati.
first, i am pushing stores to the front with all possible dispatch,
and am completing the army organization according to the orders
from washington, which are ample and perfectly satisfactory.
it will take us all of april to get in our furloughed veterans, to
bring up a. j. smith's command, and to collect provisions and
cattle on the line of the tennessee. each of the armies will guard,
by detachments of its own, its rear communications.
at the signal to be given by you, schofield, leaving a select
garrison at knoxville and london, with twelve thousand men will
drop down to the hiawassee, and march against johnston's right by
the old federal road. stoneman, now in kentucky, organizing the
cavalry forces of the army of the ohio, will operate with schofield
on his left front—it may be, pushing a select body of about
two thousand cavalry by ducktown or elijah toward athens,
georgia.
thomas will aim to have forty-five thousand men of all arms, and
move straight against johnston, wherever he may be, fighting him
cautiously, persistently, and to the best advantage. he will have
two divisions of cavalry, to take advantage of any offering.
mcpherson will have nine divisions of the army of the tennessee, if
a. j. smith gets here, in which case he will have full thirty
thousand of the best men in america. he will cross the tennessee at
decatur and whitesburg, march toward rome, and feel for thomas. if
johnston falls behind the coosa, then mcpherson will push for rome;
and if johnston falls behind the chattahoochee, as i believe he
will, then mcpherson will cross over and join thomas.
mcpherson has no cavalry, but i have taken one of thomas's
divisions, viz., garrard's, six thousand strong, which is now at
colombia, mounting, equipping, and preparing. i design this
division to operate on mcpherson's right, rear, or front, according
as the enemy appears. but the moment i detect johnston falling
behind the chattahoochee, i propose to cast off the effective part
of this cavalry division, after crossing the coosa, straight for
opelika, west point, columbus, or wetumpka, to break up the road
between montgomery and georgia. if garrard can do this work well,
he can return to the union army; but should a superior force
interpose, then he will seek safety at pensacola and join banks,
or, after rest, will act against any force that he can find east of
mobile, till such time as he can reach me.
should johnston fall behind the chattahoochee, i will feign to the
right, but pass to the left and act against atlanta or its eastern
communications, according to developed facts.
this is about as far ahead as i feel disposed, to look, but i will
ever bear in mind that johnston is at all times to be kept so busy
that he cannot in any event send any part of his command against
you or banks.
if banks can at the same time carry mobile and open up the alabama
river, he will in a measure solve the most difficult part of my
problem, viz., "provisions." but in that i must venture. georgia
has a million of inhabitants. if they can live, we should not
starve. if the enemy interrupt our communications, i will be
absolved from all obligations to subsist on our own resources, and
will feel perfectly justified in taking whatever and wherever we
can find. i will inspire my command, if successful, with the
feeling that beef and salt are all that is absolutely necessary to
life, and that parched corn once fed general jackson's army on that
very ground. as ever, your friend and servant,
w. t. sherman, major-general.
virginia, april , .
major-general w. t. sherman, commanding military division of the
mississippi.
general: since my letter to you of april th i have seen no reason
to change any portion of the general plan of campaign, if the enemy
remain still and allow us to take the initiative. rain has
continued so uninterruptedly until the last day or two that it will
be impossible to move, however, before the th, even if no more
should fall in the meantime. i think saturday, the th, will
probably be the day for our general move.
colonel comstock, who will take this, can spend a day with you, and
fill up many little gaps of information not given in any of my
letters.
what i now want more particularly to say is, that if the two main
attacks, yours and the one from here, should promise great success,
the enemy may, in a fit of desperation, abandon one part of their
line of defense, and throw their whole strength upon the other,
believing a single defeat without any victory to sustain them
better than a defeat all along their line, and hoping too, at the
same time, that the army, meeting with no resistance, will rest
perfectly satisfied with their laurels, having penetrated to a
given point south, thereby enabling them to throw their force first
upon one and then on the other.
with the majority of military commanders they might do this.
but you have had too much experience in traveling light, and
subsisting upon the country, to be caught by any such ruse. i hope
my experience has not been thrown away. my directions, then, would
be, if the enemy in your front show signs of joining lee, follow
him up to the full extent of your ability. i will prevent the
concentration of lee upon your front, if it is in the power of this
army to do it.
the army of the potomac looks well, and, so far as i can judge,
officers and men feel well. yours truly,
u. s. grant, lieutenant-general.
tennessee, april , 
lieutenant-general u. s. grant, commander-in-chief, culpepper,
virginia
general: i now have, at the hands of colonel comstock, of your
staff, the letter of april th, and am as far prepared to assume
the offensive as possible. i only ask as much time as you think
proper, to enable me to get up mcpherson's two divisions from
cairo. their furloughs will expire about this time, and some of
them should now be in motion for clifton, whence they will march to
decatur, to join general dodge.
mcpherson is ordered to assemble the fifteenth corps near larkin's,
and to get the sixteenth and seventeenth corps (dodge and blair) at
decatur at the earliest possible moment. from these two points he
will direct his forces on lebanon, summerville, and lafayette,
where he will act against johnston, if he accept battle at dalton;
or move in the direction of rome, if the enemy give up dalton, and
fall behind the oostenaula or etowah. i see that there is some risk
in dividing our forces, but thomas and schofield will have strength
enough to cover all the valleys as far as dalton; and, should
johnston turn his whole force against mcpherson, the latter will
have his bridge at larkin's, and the route to chattanooga via
willa's valley and the chattanooga creek, open for retreat; and if
johnston attempt to leave dalton, thomas will have force enough to
push on through dalton to kingston, which will checkmate him. my
own opinion is that johnston will be compelled to hang to his
railroad, the only possible avenue of supply to his army, estimated
at from forty-five to sixty thousand men.
at lafayette all our armies will be together, and if johnston
stands at dalton we must attack him in position. thomas feels
certain that he has no material increase of force, and that he has
not sent away hardee, or any part of his army. supplies are the
great question. i have materially increased the number of cars
daily. when i got here, the average was from sixty-five to eighty
per day. yesterday the report was one hundred and ninety-three;
to-day, one hundred and thirty-four; and my estimate is that one
hundred and forty-five cars per day will give us a day's supply and
a day's accumulation.
mcpherson is ordered to carry in wagons twenty day's rations, and
to rely on the depot at ringgold for the renewal of his bread.
beeves are now being driven on the hoof to the front; and the
commissary, colonel beckwith, seems fully alive to the importance
of the whole matter.
our weakest point will be from the direction of decatur, and i will
be forced to risk something from that quarter, depending on the
fact that the enemy has no force available with which to threaten
our communications from that direction.
colonel comstock will explain to you personally much that i cannot
commit to paper. i am, with great respect,
w. t. sherman, major-general.
on the th of april i removed my headquarters to chattanooga,
and prepared for taking the field in person. general grant had
first indicated the th of april as the day for the simultaneous
advance, but subsequently changed the day to may th. mcphersons
troops were brought forward rapidly to chattanooga, partly by rail
and partly by marching. thomas's troops were already in position
(his advance being out as far as ringgold-eighteen miles), and
schofield was marching down by cleveland to red clay and catoosa
springs. on the th of may, thomas was in person at ringgold, his
left at catoosa, and his right at leet's tan-yard. schofield was at
red clay, closing upon thomas's left; and mcpherson was moving
rapidly into chattanooga, and out toward gordon's mill.
on the th i rode out to ringgold, and on the very day appointed
by general grant from his headquarters in virginia the great
campaign was begun. to give all the minute details will involve
more than is contemplated, and i will endeavor only to trace the
principal events, or rather to record such as weighed heaviest on
my own mind at the time, and which now remain best fixed in my
memory.
my general headquarters and official records remained back at
nashville, and i had near me only my personal staff and
inspectors-general, with about half a dozen wagons, and a single
company of ohio sharp-shooters (commanded by lieutenant mccrory) as
headquarters or camp guard. i also had a small company of irregular
alabama cavalry (commanded by lieutenant snelling), used mostly as
orderlies and couriers. no wall-tents were allowed, only the flies.
our mess establishment was less in bulk than that of any of the
brigade commanders; nor was this from an indifference to the
ordinary comforts of life, but because i wanted to set the example,
and gradually to convert all parts of that army into a mobile
machine, willing and able to start at a minute's notice, and to
subsist on the scantiest food. to reap absolute success might
involve the necessity even of dropping all wagons, and to subsist
on the chance food which the country was known to contain. i had
obtained not only the united states census-tables of , but a
compilation made by the controller of the state of georgia for the
purpose of taxation, containing in considerable detail the
"population and statistics" of every county in georgia. one of my
aides (captain dayton) acted as assistant adjutant general, with an
order-book, letter-book, and writing-paper, that filled a small
chest not much larger than an ordinary candle-boa. the only reports
and returns called for were the ordinary tri-monthly returns of
"effective strength." as these accumulated they were sent back to
nashville, and afterward were embraced in the archives of the
military division of the mississippi, changed in  to the
military division of the missouri, and i suppose they were burned
in the chicago fire of . still, duplicates remain of all
essential papers in the archives of the war department.
the th of may was given to schofield and mcpherson to get into
position, and on the th general thomas moved in force against
tunnel hill, driving off a mere picket-guard of the enemy, and i
was agreeably surprised to find that no damage had been done to the
tunnel or the railroad. from tunnel hill i could look into the
gorge by which the railroad passed through a straight and
well-defined range of mountains, presenting sharp palisade faces,
and known as "rocky face." the gorge itself was called the "buzzard
roost." we could plainly see the enemy in this gorge and behind it,
and mill creek which formed the gorge, flowing toward dalton, had
been dammed up, making a sort of irregular lake, filling the road,
thereby obstructing it, and the enemy's batteries crowned the
cliffs on either side. the position was very strong, and i knew
that such a general as was my antagonist (jos. johnston), who had
been there six months, had fortified it to the maximum. therefore i
had no intention to attack the position seriously in front, but
depended on mcpherson to capture and hold the railroad to its rear,
which would force johnston to detach largely against him, or
rather, as i expected, to evacuate his position at dalton
altogether. my orders to generals thomas and schofield were merely
to press strongly at all points in front, ready to rush in on the
first appearance of "let go," and, if possible, to catch our enemy
in the confusion of retreat.
all the movements of the th and th were made exactly as
ordered, and the enemy seemed quiescent, acting purely on the
defensive.
i had constant communication with all parts of the army, and on
the th mcpherson's head of column entered and passed through snake
creek, perfectly undefended, and accomplished a complete surprise
to the enemy. at its farther debouche he met a cavalry brigade,
easily driven, which retreated hastily north toward dalton, and
doubtless carried to johnston the first serious intimation that a
heavy force of infantry and artillery was to his rear and within a
few miles of his railroad. i got a short note from mcpherson that
day (written at  p.m., when he was within a mile and a half of the
railroad, above and near resaca), and we all felt jubilant. i
renewed orders to thomas and schofield to be ready for the instant
pursuit of what i expected to be a broken and disordered army,
forced to retreat by roads to the east of resaca, which were known
to be very rough and impracticable.
that night i received further notice from mcpherson that he had
found resaca too strong for a surprise; that in consequence he had
fallen back three miles to the month of snake creek gap, and was
there fortified. i wrote him the next day the following letters,
copies of which are in my letter-book; but his to me were mere
notes in pencil, not retained.
tunnel hill, georgia, may , 
major-general mcpherson, commanding army of the tennessee, sugar
valley, georgia.
general: i received by courier (in the night) yours of  and .
p. m. of yesterday.
you now have your twenty-three thousand men, and general hooker is
in close support, so that you can hold all of jos. johnston's army
in check should he abandon dalton. he cannot afford to abandon
dalton, for he has fixed it up on purpose to receive us, and he
observes that we are close at hand, waiting for him to quit. he
cannot afford a detachment strong enough to fight you, as his army
will not admit of it.
strengthen your position; fight any thing that comes; and threaten
the safety of the railroad all the time. but, to tell the truth, i
would rather the enemy would stay in dalton two more days, when he
may find in his rear a larger party than he expects in an open
field. at all events, we can then choose our own ground, and he
will be forced to move out of his works. i do not intend to put a
column into buzzard-roost gap at present.
see that you are in easy communication with me and with all
head-quarters. after to-day the supplies will be at ringgold.
yours, w. t. sherman, major-general commanding.
tunnel hill, georgia, may , -evening
major-general mcpherson, commanding army of the tennessee, sugar
valley, georgia
general: the indications are that johnston is evacuating dalton. in
that event, howard's corps and the cavalry will pursue; all the
rest will follow your route. i will be down early in the
morning.
try to strike him if possible about the forks of the road.
hooker must be with you now, and you may send general garrard by
summerville to threaten rome and that flank. i will cause all the
lines to be felt at once.
w. t. sherman, major-general commanding.
mcpherson had startled johnston in his fancied security, but had
not done the full measure of his work. he had in hand twenty-three
thousand of the best men of the army, and could have walked into
resaca (then held only by a small brigade), or he could have placed
his whole force astride the railroad above resaca, and there have
easily withstood the attack of all of johnston's army, with the
knowledge that thomas and schofield were on his heels. had he done
so, i am certain that johnston would not have ventured to attack
him in position, but would have retreated eastward by spring place,
and we should have captured half his army and all his artillery and
wagons at the very beginning of the campaign.
such an opportunity does not occur twice in a single life, but
at the critical moment mcpherson seems to have been a little
cautious. still, he was perfectly justified by his orders, and fell
back and assumed an unassailable defensive position in sugar
valley, on the resaca side of snake-creek gap. as soon as informed
of this, i determined to pass the whole army through snake-creek
gap, and to move on resaca with the main army.
but during the th, the enemy showed no signs of evacuating
dalton, and i was waiting for the arrival of garrard's and
stoneman's cavalry, known to be near at hand, so as to secure the
full advantages of victory, of which i felt certain. hooker's
twentieth corps was at once moved down to within easy supporting
distance of mcpherson; and on the th, perceiving signs of
evacuation of dalton, i gave all the orders for the general
movement, leaving the fourth corps (howard) and stoneman's cavalry
in observation in front of buzzard-roost gap, and directing all the
rest of the army to march through snake-creek gap, straight on
resaca. the roads were only such as the country afforded, mere
rough wagon-ways, and these converged to the single narrow track
through snake-creek gap; but during the th and th the bulk of
thomas's and schofield's armies were got through, and deployed
against resaca, mcpherson on the right, thomas in the centre, and
schofield on the left. johnston, as i anticipated, had abandoned
all his well-prepared defenses at dalton, and was found inside of
resaca with the bulk of his army, holding his divisions well in
hand, acting purely on the defensive, and fighting well at all
points of conflict. a complete line of intrenchments was found
covering the place, and this was strongly manned at all points. on
the th we closed in, enveloping the town on its north and west,
and during the th we had a day of continual battle and skirmish.
at the same time i caused two pontoon-bridges to be laid across the
oostenaula river at lay's ferry, about three miles below the town,
by which we could threaten calhoun, a station on the railroad seven
miles below resaca. at the same time, may th, i dispatched
general garrard, with his cavalry division, down the oostenaula by
the rome road, with orders to cross over, if possible, and to
attack or threaten the railroad at any point below calhoun and
above kingston.
during the th, without attempting to assault the fortified
works, we pressed at all points, and the sound of cannon and
musketry rose all day to the dignity of a battle. toward evening
mcpherson moved his whole line of battle forward, till he had
gained a ridge overlooking the town, from which his field-artillery
could reach the railroad-bridge across the oostenaula. the enemy
made several attempts to drive him away, repeating the sallies
several times, and extending them into the night; but in every
instance he was repulsed with bloody loss.
hooker's corps had also some heavy and handsome fighting that
afternoon and night on the left, where the dalton roan entered the
intrenchments, capturing a four-gun intrenched battery, with its
men and guns; and generally all our men showed the finest fighting
qualities.
howard's corps had followed johnston down from dalton, and was
in line; stoneman's division of cavalry had also got up, and was on
the extreme left, beyond the oostenaula.
on the night of may th johnston got his army across the
bridges, set them on fire, and we entered resaca at daylight. our
loss up to that time was about six hundred dead and thirty-three
hundred and seventy-five wounded—mostly light wounds that did
not necessitate sending the men to the rear for treatment. that
johnston had deliberately designed in advance to give up such
strong positions as dalton and resaca, for the purpose of drawing
us farther south, is simply absurd. had he remained in dalton
another hour, it would have been his total defeat, and he only
evacuated resaca because his safety demanded it. the movement by us
through snake-creek gap was a total surprise to him. my army about
doubled his in size, but he had all the advantages of natural
positions, of artificial forts and roads, and of concentrated
action. we were compelled to grope our way through forests, across
mountains, with a large army, necessarily more or less dispersed.
of course, i was disappointed not to have crippled his, army more
at that particular stage of the game; but, as it resulted, these
rapid successes gave us the initiative, and the usual impulse of a
conquering army.
johnston having retreated in the night of may th, immediate
pursuit was begun. a division of infantry (jeff. c. davis's) was at
once dispatched down the valley toward rome, to support garrard's
cavalry, and the whole army was ordered to pursue, mcpherson by
lay's ferry, on the right, thomas directly by the railroad, and
schofield by the left, by the old road that crossed the oostenaula
above echota or newtown.
we hastily repaired the railroad bridge at resaca, which had
been partially burned, and built a temporary floating bridge out of
timber and materials found on the spot; so that thomas got his
advance corps over during the th, and marched as far as calhoun,
where he came into communication with mcpherson's troops, which had
crossed the oostenaula at lay's ferry by our pontoon-bridges,
previously laid. inasmuch as the bridge at resaca was overtaxed,
hooker's twentieth corps was also diverted to cross by the fords
and ferries above resaca, in the neighborhood of echota.
on the th, toward evening, the head of thomas's column,
newton's division, encountered the rear-guard of johnston's army
near adairsville. i was near the head of column at the time, trying
to get a view of the position of the enemy from an elevation in an
open field. my party attracted the fire of a battery; a shell
passed through the group of staff-officers and burst just beyond,
which scattered us promptly. the next morning the enemy had
disappeared, and our pursuit was continued to kingston, which we
reached during sunday forenoon, the th.
from resaca the railroad runs nearly due south, but at kingston
it makes junction with another railroad from rome, and changes
direction due east. at that time mcpherson's head of column was
about four miles to the west of kingston, at a country place called
"woodlawn;" schofield and hooker were on the direct roads leading
from newtown to casaville, diagonal to the route followed by
thomas. thomas's head of column, which had followed the country
roads alongside of the railroad, was about four miles east of
kingston, toward cassville, when about noon i got a message from
him that he had found the enemy, drawn up in line of battle, on
some extensive, open ground, about half-way between kingston and
cassville, and that appearances indicated a willingness and
preparation for battle.
hurriedly sending orders to mcpherson to resume the march, to
hasten forward by roads leading to the south of kingston, so as to
leave for thomas's troops and trains the use of the main road, and
to come up on his right, i rode forward rapidly, over some rough
gravel hills, and about six miles from kingston found general
thomas, with his troops deployed; but he reported that the enemy
had fallen back in echelon of divisions, steadily and in superb
order, into cassville. i knew that the roads by which generals
hooker and schofield were approaching would lead them to a seminary
near cassville, and that it was all-important to secure the point
of junction of these roads with the main road along which we were
marching. therefore i ordered general thomas to push forward his
deployed lines as rapidly as possible; and, as night was
approaching, i ordered two field-batteries to close up at a gallop
on some woods which lay between us and the town of cassville. we
could not see the town by reason of these woods, but a high range
of hills just back of the town was visible over the tree-tops. on
these hills could be seen fresh-made parapets, and the movements of
men, against whom i directed the artillery to fire at long range.
the stout resistance made by the enemy along our whole front of a
couple of miles indicated a purpose to fight at cassville; and, as
the night was closing in, general thomas and i were together, along
with our skirmish-lines near the seminary, on the edge of the town,
where musket-bullets from the enemy were cutting the leaves of the
trees pretty thickly about us. either thomas or i remarked that
that was not the place for the two senior officers of a great army,
and we personally went back to the battery, where we passed the
night on the ground. during the night i had reports from mcpherson,
hooker, and schofield. the former was about five miles to my right
rear, near the "nitre-caves;" schofield was about six miles north,
and hooker between us, within two miles. all were ordered to close
down on cassville at daylight, and to attack the enemy wherever
found. skirmishing was kept up all night, but when day broke the
next morning, may th, the enemy was gone, and our cavalry was
sent in pursuit. these reported him beyond the etowah river. we
were then well in advance of our railroad-trains, on which we
depended for supplies; so i determined to pause a few days to
repair the railroad, which had been damaged but little, except at
the bridge at resaca, and then to go on.
nearly all the people of the country seemed to have fled with
johnston's army; yet some few families remained, and from one of
them i procured the copy of an order which johnston had made at
adairsville, in which he recited that he had retreated as far as
strategy required, and that his army must be prepared for battle at
cassville. the newspapers of the south, many of which we found,
were also loud in denunciation of johnston's falling back before us
without a serious battle, simply resisting by his skirmish-lines
and by his rear-guard. but his friends proclaimed that it was all
strategic; that he was deliberately drawing us farther and farther
into the meshes, farther and farther away from our base of
supplies, and that in due season he would not only halt for battle,
but assume the bold offensive. of course it was to my interest to
bring him to battle as soon as possible, when our numerical
superiority was at the greatest; for he was picking up his
detachments as he fell back, whereas i was compelled to make
similar and stronger detachments to repair the railroads as we
advanced, and to guard them. i found at cassville many evidences of
preparation for a grand battle, among them a long line of fresh
intrenchments on the hill beyond the town, extending nearly three
miles to the south, embracing the railroad-crossing. i was also
convinced that the whole of polk's corps had joined johnston from
mississippi, and that he had in hand three full corps, viz.,
hood's, polk's, and hardee's, numbering about sixty thousand men,
and could not then imagine why he had declined battle, and did not
learn the real reason till after the war was over, and then from
general johnston himself.
in the autumn of , when in command of the military division
of the missouri, i went from st. louis to little rock, arkansas,
and afterward to memphis. taking a steamer for cairo, i found as
fellow-passengers generals johnston and frank blair. we were, of
course, on the most friendly terms, and on our way up we talked
over our battles again, played cards, and questioned each other as
to particular parts of our mutual conduct in the game of war. i
told johnston that i had seen his order of preparation, in the
nature of an address to his army, announcing his purpose to retreat
no more, but to accept battle at cassville. he answered that such
was his purpose; that he had left hardee's corps in the open fields
to check thomas, and gain time for his formation on the ridge, just
behind cassville; and it was this corps which general thomas had
seen deployed, and whose handsome movement in retreat he had
reported in such complimentary terms. johnston described how he had
placed hood's corps on the right, polk's in the centre, and
hardee's on the left. he said he had ridden over the ground, given
to each corps commander his position, and orders to throw up
parapets during the night; that he was with hardee on his extreme
left as the night closed in, and as hardee's troops fell back to
the position assigned them for the intended battle of the next day;
and that, after giving hardee some general instructions, he and his
staff rode back to cassville. as he entered the town, or village,
he met generals hood and polk. hood inquired of him if he had had
any thing to eat, and he said no, that he was both hungry and
tired, when hood invited him to go and share a supper which had
been prepared for him at a house close by. at the supper they
discussed the chances of the impending battle, when hood spoke of
the ground assigned him as being enfiladed by our (union)
artillery, which johnston disputed, when general polk chimed in
with the remark that general hood was right; that the cannon-shots
fired by us at nightfall had enfiladed their general line of
battle, and that for this reason he feared they could not hold
their men. general johnston was surprised at this, for he
understood general hood to be one of those who professed to
criticise his strategy, contending that, instead of retreating, he
should have risked a battle. general johnston said he was provoked,
accused them of having been in conference, with being beaten before
battle, and added that he was unwilling to engage in a critical
battle with an army so superior to his own in numbers, with two of
his three corps commanders dissatisfied with the ground and
positions assigned them. he then and there made up his mind to
retreat still farther south, to put the etowah river and the
allatoona range between us; and he at once gave orders to resume
the retrograde movement.
this was my recollection of the substance of the conversation,
of which i made no note at the time; but, at a meeting of the
society of the army of the cumberland some years after, at
cleveland, ohio, about , in a short after-dinner speech, i
related this conversation, and it got into print. subsequently, in
the spring of , when i was at new orleans, on route for texas,
general hood called to see me at the st. charles hotel, explained
that he had seen my speech reprinted in the newspapers and gave me
his version of the same event, describing the halt at cassville,
the general orders for battle on that ground, and the meeting at
supper with generals johnston and polk, when the chances of the
battle to be fought the next day were freely and fully discussed;
and he stated that he had argued against fighting the battle purely
on the defensive, but had asked general johnston to permit him with
his own corps and part of polk's to quit their lines, and to march
rapidly to attack and overwhelm schofield, who was known to be
separated from thomas by an interval of nearly five miles, claiming
that he could have defeated schofield, and got back to his position
in time to meet general thomas's attack in front. he also stated
that he had then contended with johnston for the
"offensive-defensive" game, instead of the "pure defensive," as
proposed by general johnston; and he said that it was at this time
that general johnston had taken offense, and that it was for this
reason he had ordered the retreat that night. as subsequent events
estranged these two officers, it is very natural they should now
differ on this point; but it was sufficient for us that the rebel
army did retreat that night, leaving us masters of all the country
above the etowah river.
for the purposes of rest, to give time for the repair of the
railroads, and to replenish supplies, we lay by some few days in
that quarter—schofield with stoneman's cavalry holding the
ground at cassville depot, cartersville, and the etowah bridge;
thomas holding his ground near cassville, and mcpherson that near
kingston. the officer intrusted with the repair of the railroads
was colonel w. w. wright, a railroad-engineer, who, with about two
thousand men, was so industrious and skillful that the bridge at
resaca was rebuilt in three days, and cars loaded with stores came
forward to kingston on the th. the telegraph also brought us the
news of the bloody and desperate battles of the wilderness, in
virginia, and that general grant was pushing his operations against
lee with terrific energy. i was therefore resolved to give my enemy
no rest.
in early days (), when a lieutenant of the third artillery,
i had been sent from charleston, south carolina, to marietta,
georgia, to assist inspector-general churchill to take testimony
concerning certain losses of horses and accoutrements by the
georgia volunteers during the florida war; and after completing the
work at marietta we transferred our party over to bellefonte,
alabama. i had ridden the distance on horseback, and had noted well
the topography of the country, especially that about kenesaw,
allatoona, and the etowah river. on that occasion i had stopped
some days with a colonel tumlin, to see some remarkable indian
mounds on the etowah river, usually called the "hightower:" i
therefore knew that the allatoona pass was very strong, would be
hard to force, and resolved not even to attempt it, but to turn the
position, by moving from kingston to marietta via. dallas;
accordingly i made orders on the th to get ready for the march to
begin on the d. the army of the cumberland was ordered to march
for dallas, by euharlee and stilesboro; davis's division, then in
rome, by van wert; the army of the ohio to keep on the left of
thomas, by a place called burnt hickory; and the army of the
tennessee to march for a position a little to the south, so as to
be on the right of the general army, when grouped about dallas.
the movement contemplated leaving our railroad, and to depend
for twenty days on the contents of our wagons; and as the country
was very obscure, mostly in a state of nature, densely wooded, and
with few roads, our movements were necessarily slow. we crossed the
etowah by several bridges and fords, and took as many roads as
possible, keeping up communication by cross-roads, or by couriers
through the woods. i personally joined general thomas, who had the
centre, and was consequently the main column, or "column of
direction." the several columns followed generally the valley of
the euharlee, a tributary coming into the etowah from the south,
and gradually crossed over a ridge of mountains, parts of which had
once been worked over for gold, and were consequently full of paths
and unused wagon-roads or tracks. a cavalry picket of the enemy at
burnt hickory was captured, and had on his person an order from
general johnston, dated at allatoona, which showed that he had
detected my purpose of turning his position, and it accordingly
became necessary to use great caution, lest some of the minor
columns should fall into ambush, but, luckily the enemy was not
much more familiar with that part of the country than we were. on
the other side of the allatoona range, the pumpkin-vine creek, also
a tributary of the etowah, flowed north and west; dallas, the point
aimed at, was a small town on the other or east side of this creek,
and was the point of concentration of a great many roads that led
in every direction. its possession would be a threat to marietta
and atlanta, but i could not then venture to attempt either, till i
had regained the use of the railroad, at least as far down as its
debouche from the allatoona range of mountains. therefore, the
movement was chiefly designed to compel johnston to give up
allatoona.
on the th all the columns were moving steadily on
dallas—mcpherson and davis away off to the right, near van
wert; thomas on the main road in the centre, with hooker's
twentieth corps ahead, toward dallas; and schofield to the left
rear. for the convenience of march, hooker had his three divisions
on separate roads, all leading toward dallas, when, in the
afternoon, as he approached a bridge across pumpkin-vine creek, he
found it held by a cavalry force, which was driven off, but the
bridge was on fire. this fire was extinguished, and hooker's
leading division (geary's) followed the retreating cavalry on a
road leading due east toward marietta, instead of dallas. this
leading division, about four miles out from the bridge, struck a
heavy infantry force, which was moving down from allatoona toward
dallas, and a sharp battle ensued. i came up in person soon after,
and as my map showed that we were near an important cross-road
called "new hope," from a methodist meeting-house there of that
name, i ordered general hooker to secure it if possible that night.
he asked for a short delay, till he could bring up his other two
divisions, viz., of butterfield and williams, but before these
divisions had got up and were deployed, the enemy had also gained
corresponding strength. the woods were so dense, and the resistance
so spirited, that hooker could not carry the position, though the
battle was noisy, and prolonged far into the night. this point,
"new hope," was the accidental intersection of the road leading
from allatoona to dallas with that from van wert to marietta, was
four miles northeast of dallas, and from the bloody fighting there
for the next week was called by the soldiers "hell-hole."
the night was pitch-dark, it rained hard, and the convergence of
our columns toward dallas produced much confusion. i am sure
similar confusion existed in the army opposed to us, for we were
all mixed up. i slept on the ground, without cover, alongside of a
log, got little sleep, resolved at daylight to renew the battle,
and to make a lodgment on the dallas and allatoona road if
possible, but the morning revealed a strong line of intrenchments
facing us, with a heavy force of infantry and guns. the battle was
renewed, and without success. mcpherson reached dallas that
morning, viz., the th, and deployed his troops to the southeast
and east of the town, placing davis's division of the fourteenth
corps, which had joined him on the road from rome, on his left; but
this still left a gap of at least three miles between davis and
hooker. meantime, also, general schofield was closing up on
thomas's left.
satisfied that johnston in person was at new hope with all his
army, and that it was so much nearer my "objective;" the railroad,
than dallas, i concluded to draw mcpherson from dallas to hooker's
right, and gave orders accordingly; but mcpherson also was
confronted with a heavy force, and, as he began to withdraw
according to his orders, on the morning of the th he was fiercely
assailed on his right; a bloody battle ensued, in which he repulsed
the attack, inflicting heavy loss on his assailants, and it was not
until the st of june that he was enabled to withdraw from dallas,
and to effect a close junction with hooker in front of new hope.
meantime thomas and schofield were completing their deployments,
gradually overlapping johnston on his right, and thus extending our
left nearer and nearer to the railroad, the nearest point of which
was acworth, about eight miles distant. all this time a continual
battle was in progress by strong skirmish-lines, taking advantage
of every species of cover, and both parties fortifying each night
by rifle-trenches, with head-logs, many of which grew to be as
formidable as first-class works of defense. occasionally one party
or the other would make a dash in the nature of a sally, but
usually it sustained a repulse with great loss of life. i visited
personally all parts of our lines nearly every day, was constantly
within musket-range, and though the fire of musketry and cannon
resounded day and night along the whole line, varying from six to
ten miles, i rarely saw a dozen of the enemy at any one time; and
these were always skirmishers dodging from tree to tree, or behind
logs on the ground, or who occasionally showed their heads above
the hastily-constructed but remarkably strong rifle-trenches. on
the occasion of my visit to mcpherson on the th of may, while
standing with a group of officers, among whom were generals
mcpherson, logan, barry, and colonel taylor, my former chief of
artillery, a minie-ball passed through logan's coat-sleeve,
scratching the skin, and struck colonel taylor square in the
breast; luckily he had in his pocket a famous memorandum-book, in
which he kept a sort of diary, about which we used to joke him a
good deal; its thickness and size saved his life, breaking the
force of the ball, so that after traversing the book it only
penetrated the breast to the ribs, but it knocked him down and
disabled him for the rest of the campaign. he was a most competent
and worthy officer, and now lives in poverty in chicago, sustained
in part by his own labor, and in part by a pitiful pension recently
granted.
on the st of june general mcpherson closed in upon the right,
and, without attempting further to carry the enemy's strong
position at new hope church, i held our general right in close
contact with it, gradually, carefully, and steadily working by the
left, until our strong infantry-lines had reached and secured
possession of all the wagon-roads between new hope, allatoona, and
acworth, when i dispatched generals garrard's and stoneman's
divisions of cavalry into allatoona, the first around by the west
end of the pass, and the latter by the direct road. both reached
their destination without opposition, and orders were at once given
to repair the railroad forward from kingston to allatoona,
embracing the bridge across the etowah river. thus the real object
of my move on dallas was accomplished, and on the th of june i was
preparing to draw off from new hope church, and to take position on
the railroad in front of allatoona, when, general johnston himself
having evacuated his position, we effected the change without
further battle, and moved to the railroad, occupying it from
allatoona and acworth forward to big shanty, in sight of the famous
kenesaw mountain.
thus, substantially in the month of may, we had steadily driven
our antagonist from the strong positions of dalton, resaea,
cassville, allatoona, and dallas; had advanced our lines in strong,
compact order from chattanooga to big shanty, nearly a hundred
miles of as difficult country as was ever fought over by civilized
armies; and thus stood prepared to go on, anxious to fight, and
confident of success as soon as the railroad communications were
complete to bring forward the necessary supplies. it is now
impossible to state accurately our loss of life and men in any one
separate battle; for the fighting was continuous, almost daily,
among trees and bushes, on ground where one could rarely see a
hundred yards ahead.
the aggregate loss in the several corps for the month of may is
reported-as follows in the usual monthly returns sent to the
adjutant-general's office, which are, therefore, official:
casualties during the month of may, 
(major-general sherman commanding).
killed and missing.
wounded.
total.
general joseph e. johnston, in his "narrative of his military
operations," just published (march , ), gives the effective
strength of his army at and about dalton on the st of may, 
(page ), as follows:
infantry
artillery
cavalry
 total
during may, and prior to reaching cassville, he was further
reenforced.
polk's corps of three divisions
martin's division of cavalry
jackson's division of cavalry
and at new hope church, may th
brigade of quarles
 grand-total
his losses during the month of may are stated by him, as taken
from the report of surgeon foard.
killed
wounded
total
these figures include only the killed and wounded, whereas my
statement of losses embraces the "missing," which are usually
"prisoners," and of these we captured, during the whole campaign of
four and a half months, exactly ,, whose names, rank, and
regiments, were officially reported to the commissary-general of
prisoners; and assuming a due proportion for the month of may,
viz., one-fourth, makes , to be added to the killed and wounded
given above, making an aggregate loss in johnston's army, from
dalton to new hope, inclusive, of ,, against ours of ,.
therefore general johnston is greatly in error, in his estimates
on page , in stating our loss, as compared with his, at six or
ten to one.
i always estimated my force at about double his, and could
afford to lose two to one without disturbing our relative
proportion; but i also reckoned that, in the natural strength of
the country, in the abundance of mountains, streams, and forests,
he had a fair offset to our numerical superiority, and therefore
endeavored to act with reasonable caution while moving on the
vigorous "offensive."
with the drawn battle of new hope church, and our occupation of
the natural fortress of allatoona, terminated the month of may, and
the first stage of the campaign.
on the st of june our three armies were well in hand, in the
broken and densely-wooded country fronting the enemy intrenched at
new hope church, about five miles north of dallas. general
stoneman's division of cavalry had occupied allatoona, on the
railroad, and general garrard's division was at the western end of
the pass, about stilesboro. colonel w. w. wright, of the engineers,
was busily employed in repairing the railroad and rebuilding the
bridge across the etowah (or high tower) river, which had been
destroyed by the enemy on his retreat; and the armies were engaged
in a general and constant skirmish along a front of about six
miles—mcpherson the right, thomas the centre, and schofield
on the left. by gradually covering our front with parapet, and
extending to the left, we approached the railroad toward acworth
and overlapped the enemy's right. by the th of june we had made
such progress that johnston evacuated his lines in the night,
leaving us masters of the situation, when i deliberately shifted
mcpherson's army to the extreme left, at and in front of acworth,
with thomas's about two miles on his right, and schofield's on his
right all facing east. heavy rains set in about the st of june,
making the roads infamous; but our marches were short, as we needed
time for the repair of the railroad, so as to bring supplies
forward to allatoona station. on the th i rode back to allatoona,
seven miles, found it all that was expected, and gave orders for
its fortification and preparation as a "secondary base."
general blair arrived at acworth on the th with his two
divisions of the seventeenth corps—the same which had been on
veteran furlough—had come up from cairo by way of clifton, on
the tennessee river, and had followed our general route to
allatoona, where he had left a garrison of about fifteen hundred
men. his effective strength, as reported, was nine thousand. these,
with new regiments and furloughed men who had joined early in the
month of may, equaled our losses from battle, sickness, and by
detachments; so that the three armies still aggregated about one
hundred thousand effective men.
on the th of june the whole combined army moved forward six
miles, to "big shanty," a station on the railroad, whence we had a
good view of the enemy's position, which embraced three prominent
hills known as kenesaw, pine mountain, and lost mountain. on each
of these hills the enemy had signal-stations and fresh lines of
parapets. heavy masses of infantry could be distinctly seen with
the naked eye, and it was manifest that johnston had chosen his
ground well, and with deliberation had prepared for battle; but his
line was at least ten miles in extent—too long, in my
judgment, to be held successfully by his force, then estimated at
sixty thousand. as his position, however, gave him a perfect view
over our field, we had to proceed with due caution. mcpherson had
the left, following the railroad, which curved around the north
base of kenesaw; thomas the centre, obliqued to the right,
deploying below kenesaw and facing pine hill; and schofield,
somewhat refused, was on the general right, looking south, toward
lost mountain.
on the th the etowah bridge was done; the railroad was
repaired up to our very skirmish line, close to the base of
kenesaw, and a loaded train of cars came to big shanty. the
locomotive, detached, was run forward to a water-tank within the
range of the enemy's guns on kenesaw, whence the enemy opened fire
on the locomotive; but the engineer was not afraid, went on to the
tank, got water, and returned safely to his train, answering the
guns with the screams of his engine, heightened by the cheers and
shouts of our men.
the rains continued to pour, and made our developments slow and
dilatory, for there were no roads, and these had to be improvised
by each division for its own supply train from the depot in big
shanty to the camps. meantime each army was deploying carefully
before the enemy, intrenching every camp, ready as against a sally.
the enemy's cavalry was also busy in our rear, compelling us to
detach cavalry all the way back as far as resaca, and to strengthen
all the infantry posts as far as nashville. besides, there was
great danger, always in my mind, that forrest would collect a heavy
cavalry command in mississippi, cross the tennessee river, and
break up our railroad below nashville. in anticipation of this very
danger, i had sent general sturgis to memphis to take command of
all the cavalry in that quarter, to go out toward pontotoc, engage
forrest and defeat him; but on the th of june i learned that
general sturgis had himself been defeated on the th of june, and
had been driven by forrest back into memphis in considerable
confusion. i expected that this would soon be followed by a general
raid on all our roads in tennessee. general g. j. smith, with the
two divisions of the sixteenth and seventeenth corps which had been
with general banks up red river, had returned from that ill-fated
expedition, and had been ordered to general canby at new orleans,
who was making a diversion about mobile; but, on hearing of general
sturgis's defeat, i ordered general smith to go out from memphis
and renew the offensive, so as to keep forrest off our roads. this
he did finally, defeating forrest at tupelo, on the th, th, and
th days of july; and he so stirred up matters in north
mississippi that forrest could not leave for tennessee. this, for a
time, left me only the task of covering the roads against such
minor detachments of cavalry as johnston could spare from his
immediate army, and i proposed to keep these too busy in their own
defense to spare detachments. by the th the rain slackened, and
we occupied a continuous line of ten miles, intrenched, conforming
to the irregular position of the enemy, when i reconnoitred, with a
view to make a break in their line between kenesaw and pine
mountain. when abreast of pine mountain i noticed a rebel battery
on its crest, with a continuous line of fresh rifle-trench about
half-way down the hill. our skirmishers were at the time engaged in
the woods about the base of this hill between the lines, and i
estimated the distance to the battery on the crest at about eight
hundred yards. near it, in plain view, stood a group of the enemy,
evidently observing us with glasses. general howard, commanding the
fourth corps, was near by, and i called his attention to this
group, and ordered him to compel it to keep behind its cover. he
replied that his orders from general thomas were to spare
artillery-ammunition. this was right, according to the general
policy, but i explained to him that we must keep up the morale of a
bold offensive, that he must use his artillery, force the enemy to
remain on the timid defensive, and ordered him to cause a battery
close by to fire three volleys. i continued to ride down our line,
and soon heard, in quick succession, the three volleys. the next
division in order was geary's, and i gave him similar orders.
general polk, in my opinion, was killed by the second volley fired
from the first battery referred to.
in a conversation with general johnston, after the war, he
explained that on that day he had ridden in person from marietta to
pine mountain, held by bates's division, and was accompanied by
generals hardee and polk. when on pine mountain, reconnoitring,
quite a group of soldiers, belonging to the battery close by,
clustered about him. he noticed the preparations of our battery to
fire, and cautioned these men to scatter. they did so, and he
likewise hurried behind the parapet, from which he had an equally
good view of our position but general polk, who was dignified and
corpulent, walked back slowly, not wishing to appear too hurried or
cautious in the presence of the men, and was struck across the
breast by an unexploded shell, which killed him instantly. this is
my memory of the conversation, and it is confirmed by johnston
himself in his "narrative," page , except that he calculated the
distance of our battery at six hundred yards, and says that polk
was killed by the third shot; i know that our guns fired by volley,
and believe that he was hit by a shot of the second volley. it has
been asserted that i fired the gun which killed general polk, and
that i knew it was directed against that general. the fact is, at
that distance we could not even tell that the group were officers
at all; i was on horseback, a couple of hundred yards off, before
my orders to fire were executed, had no idea that our shot had
taken effect, and continued my ride down along the line to
schofield's extreme flank, returning late in the evening to my
head-quarters at big shanty, where i occupied an abandoned house.
in a cotton-field back of that house was our signal-station, on the
roof of an old gin-house. the signal-officer reported that by
studying the enemy's signals he had learned the key, and that he
could read their signals. he explained to me that he had translated
a signal about noon, from pine mountain to marietta, "send an
ambulance for general polk's body;" and later in the day another,
"why don't you send an ambulance for general polk?" from this we
inferred that general polk had been killed, but how or where we
knew not; and this inference was confirmed later in the same day by
the report of some prisoners who had been captured.
on the th we advanced our general lines, intending to attack
at any weak point discovered between kenesaw and pine mountain; but
pine mountain was found to be abandoned, and johnston had
contracted his front somewhat, on a direct line, connecting kenesaw
with lost mountain. thomas and schofield thereby gained about two
miles of most difficult, country, and mcpherson's left lapped well
around the north end of kenesaw. we captured a good many prisoners,
among them a whole infantry regiment, the fourteenth alabama, three
hundred and twenty strong.
on the th the general movement was continued, when lost
mountain was abandoned by the enemy. our right naturally swung
round, so as to threaten the railroad below marietta, but johnston
had still further contracted and strengthened his lines, covering
marietta and all the roads below.
on the th and th the rain again fell in torrents, making
army movements impossible, but we devoted the time to strengthening
our positions, more especially the left and centre, with a view
gradually to draw from the left to add to the right; and we had to
hold our lines on the left extremely strong, to guard against a
sally from kenesaw against our depot at big shanty. garrard's
division of cavalry was kept busy on our left, mcpherson had
gradually extended to his right, enabling thomas to do the same
still farther; but the enemy's position was so very strong, and
everywhere it was covered by intrenchments, that we found it as
dangerous to assault as a permanent fort. we in like manner covered
our lines of battle by similar works, and even our skirmishers
learned to cover their bodies by the simplest and best forms of
defensive works, such as rails or logs, piled in the form of a
simple lunette, covered on the outside with earth thrown up at
night.
the enemy and ourselves used the same form of rifle-trench,
varied according to the nature of the ground, viz.: the trees and
bushes were cut away for a hundred yards or more in front, serving
as an abatis or entanglement; the parapets varied from four to six
feet high, the dirt taken from a ditch outside and from a covered
way inside, and this parapet was surmounted by a "head-log,"
composed of the trunk of a tree from twelve to twenty inches at the
butt, lying along the interior crest of the parapet and resting in
notches cut in other trunks which extended back, forming an
inclined plane, in case the head-log should be knocked inward by a
cannon-shot. the men of both armies became extremely skillful in
the construction of these works, because each man realized their
value and importance to himself, so that it required no orders for
their construction. as soon as a regiment or brigade gained a
position within easy distance for a sally, it would set to work
with a will, and would construct such a parapet in a single night;
but i endeavored to spare the soldiers this hard labor by
authorizing each division commander to organize out of the freedmen
who escaped to us a pioneer corps of two hundred men, who were fed
out of the regular army supplies, and i promised them ten dollars a
month, under an existing act of congress. these pioneer detachments
became very useful to us during the rest of the war, for they could
work at night while our men slept; they in turn were not expected
to fight, and could therefore sleep by day. our enemies used their
slaves for a similar purpose, but usually kept them out of the
range of fire by employing them to fortify and strengthen the
position to their rear next to be occupied in their general
retrograde. during this campaign hundreds if not thousands of miles
of similar intrenchments were built by both armies, and, as a rule,
whichever party attacked got the worst of it.
on the th of june the rebel army again fell back on its
flanks, to such an extent that for a time i supposed it had
retreated to the chattahoochee river, fifteen miles distant; but as
we pressed forward we were soon undeceived, for we found it still
more concentrated, covering marietta and the railroad. these
successive contractions of the enemy's line encouraged us and
discouraged him, but were doubtless justified by sound reasons. on
the th johnston's position was unusually strong. kenesaw mountain
was his salient; his two flanks were refused and covered by
parapets and by noonday and nose's creeks. his left flank was his
weak point, so long as he acted on the "defensive," whereas, had he
designed to contract the extent of his line for the purpose of
getting in reserve a force with which to strike "offensively" from
his right, he would have done a wise act, and i was compelled to
presume that such was his object: we were also so far from
nashville and chattanooga that we were naturally sensitive for the
safety of our railroad and depots, so that the left (mcpherson) was
held very strong.
about this time came reports that a large cavalry force of the
enemy had passed around our left flank, evidently to strike this
very railroad somewhere below chattanooga. i therefore reenforced
the cavalry stationed from resaca to casaville, and ordered forward
from huntsville, alabama, the infantry division of general john e.
smith, to hold kingston securely.
while we were thus engaged about kenesaw, general grant had his
hands full with lee, in virginia. general halleck was the chief of
staff at washington, and to him i communicated almost daily. i find
from my letter-book that on the st of june i reported to him
tersely and truly the condition of facts on that day: "this is the
nineteenth day of rain, and the prospect of fair weather is as far
off as ever. the roads are impassable; the fields and woods become
quagmire's after a few wagons have crossed over. yet we are at work
all the time. the left flank is across noonday creek, and the right
is across nose's creek. the enemy still holds kenesaw, a conical
mountain, with marietta behind it, and has his flanks retired, to
cover that town and the railroad behind. i am all ready to attack
the moment the weather and roads will permit troops and artillery
to move with any thing like life."
the weather has a wonderful effect on troops: in action and on
the march, rain is favorable; but in the woods, where all is blind
and uncertain, it seems almost impossible for an army covering ten
miles of front to act in concert during wet and stormy weather.
still i pressed operations with the utmost earnestness, aiming
always to keep our fortified lines in absolute contact with the
enemy, while with the surplus force we felt forward, from one flank
or the other, for his line of communication and retreat. on the d
of june i rode the whole line, and ordered general thomas in person
to advance his extreme right corps (hooker's); and instructed
general schofield, by letter, to keep his entire army, viz., the
twenty-third corps, as a strong right flank in close support of
hooker's deployed line. during this day the sun came out, with some
promise of clear weather, and i had got back to my bivouac about
dark, when a signal message was received, dated—
general sherman: we have repulsed two heavy attacks, and feel
confident, our only apprehension being from our extreme right
flank. three entire corps are in front of us.
major-general hooker.
hooker's corps (the twentieth) belonged to thomas's army;
thomas's headquarters were two miles nearer to hooker than mine;
and hooker, being an old army officer, knew that he should have
reported this fact to thomas and not to me; i was, moreover,
specially disturbed by the assertion in his report that he was
uneasy about his right flank, when schofield had been specially
ordered to protect that. i first inquired of my adjutant, dayton,
if he were certain that general schofield had received his orders,
and he answered that the envelope in which he had sent them was
receipted by general schofield himself. i knew, therefore, that
general schofield must be near by, in close support of hooker's
right flank. general thomas had before this occasion complained to
me of general hooker's disposition to "switch off," leaving wide
gaps in his line, so as to be independent, and to make glory on his
own account. i therefore resolved not to overlook this breach of
discipline and propriety. the rebel army was only composed of three
corps; i had that very day ridden six miles of their lines, found
them everywhere strongly occupied, and therefore hooker could not
have encountered "three entire corps." both mcpherson and schofield
had also complained to me of this same tendency of hooker to widen
the gap between his own corps and his proper army (thomas's), so as
to come into closer contact with one or other of the wings,
asserting that he was the senior by commission to both mcpherson
and schofield, and that in the event of battle he should assume
command over them, by virtue of his older commission.
they appealed to me to protect them. i had heard during that day
some cannonading and heavy firing down toward the "kulp house,"
which was about five miles southeast of where i was, but this was
nothing unusual, for at the same moment there was firing along our
lines full ten miles in extent. early the next day (d) i rode
down to the "kulp house," which was on a road leading from powder
springs to marietta, about three miles distant from the latter. on
the way i passed through general butterfield's division of hooker's
corps, which i learned had not been engaged at all in the battle of
the day before; then i rode along geary's and williams's divisions,
which occupied the field of battle, and the men were engaged in
burying the dead. i found general schofield's corps on the powder
springs road, its head of column abreast of hooker's right,
therefore constituting "a strong right flank," and i met generale
schofield and hooker together. as rain was falling at the moment,
we passed into a little church standing by the road-side, and i
there showed general schofield hooker's signal-message of the day
before. he was very angry, and pretty sharp words passed between
them, schofield saying that his head of column (hascall's division)
had been, at the time of the battle, actually in advance of
hooker's line; that the attack or sally of the enemy struck his
troops before it did hooker's; that general hooker knew of it at
the time; and he offered to go out and show me that the dead men of
his advance division (hascall's) were lying farther out than any of
hooker's. general hooker pretended not to have known this fact. i
then asked him why he had called on me for help, until he had used
all of his own troops; asserting that i had just seen butterfield's
division, and had learned from him that he had not been engaged the
day before at all; and i asserted that the enemy's sally must have
been made by one corps (hood's), in place of three, and that it had
fallen on geary's and williams's divisions, which had repulsed the
attack handsomely. as we rode away from that church general hooker
was by my side, and i told him that such a thing must not occur
again; in other words, i reproved him more gently than the occasion
demanded, and from that time he began to sulk. general hooker had
come from the east with great fame as a "fighter," and at
chattanooga he was glorified by his "battle above the clouds,"
which i fear turned his head. he seemed jealous of all the army
commanders, because in years, former rank, and experience, he
thought he was our superior.
on the d of june i telegraphed to general halleck this
summary, which i cannot again better state:
we continue to press forward on the principle of an advance
against fortified positions. the whole country is one vast fort,
and johnston must have at least fifty miles of connected trenches,
with abatis and finished batteries. we gain ground daily, fighting
all the time. on the st general stanley gained a position near
the south end of kenesaw, from which the enemy attempted in vain to
drive him; and the same day general t. j. wood's division took a
hill, which the enemy assaulted three times at night without
success, leaving more than a hundred dead on the ground. yesterday
the extreme right (hooker and schofield) advanced on the powder
springs road to within three miles of marietta. the enemy made a
strong effort to drive them away, but failed signally, leaving more
than two hundred dead on the field. our lines are now in close
contact, and the fighting is incessant, with a good deal of
artillery-fire. as fast as we gain one position the enemy has
another all ready, but i think he will soon have to let go kenesaw,
which is the key to the whole country. the weather is now better,
and the roads are drying up fast. our losses are light, and,
not-withstanding the repeated breaks of the road to our rear,
supplies are ample.
during the th and th of june general schofield extended his
right as far as prudent, so as to compel the enemy to thin out his
lines correspondingly, with the intention to make two strong
assaults at points where success would give us the greatest
advantage. i had consulted generals thomas, mcpherson, and
schofield, and we all agreed that we could not with prudence
stretch out any more, and therefore there was no alternative but to
attack "fortified lines," a thing carefully avoided up to that
time. i reasoned, if we could make a breach anywhere near the rebel
centre, and thrust in a strong head of column, that with the one
moiety of our army we could hold in check the corresponding wing of
the enemy, and with the other sweep in flank and overwhelm the
other half. the th of june was fixed as the day for the attempt,
and in order to oversee the whole, and to be in close communication
with all parts of the army, i had a place cleared on the top of a
hill to the rear of thomas's centre, and had the telegraph-wires
laid to it. the points of attack were chosen, and the troops were
all prepared with as little demonstration as possible. about  a.m.
of the day appointed, the troops moved to the assault, and all
along our lines for ten miles a furious fire of artillery and
musketry was kept up. at all points the enemy met us with
determined courage and in great force. mcpherson's attacking column
fought up the face of the lesser kenesaw, but could not reach the
summit. about a mile to the right (just below the dallas road)
thomas's assaulting column reached the parapet, where
brigadier-general barker was shot down mortally wounded, and
brigadier-general daniel mccook (my old law-partner) was
desperately wounded, from the effects of which he afterward died.
by . the assault was in fact over, and had failed. we had not
broken the rebel line at either point, but our assaulting columns
held their ground within a few yards of the rebel trenches, and
there covered themselves with parapet. mcpherson lost about five
hundred men and several valuable officers, and thomas lost nearly
two thousand men. this was the hardest fight of the campaign up to
that date, and it is well described by johnston in his "narrative"
(pages , ), where he admits his loss in killed and wounded
as
total ............. 
this, no doubt, is a true and fair statement; but, as usual,
johnston overestimates our loss, putting it at six thousand,
whereas our entire loss was about twenty-five hundred, killed and
wounded.
while the battle was in progress at the centre, schofield
crossed olley's creek on the right, and gained a position
threatening johnston's line of retreat; and, to increase the
effect, i ordered stoneman's cavalry to proceed rapidly still
farther to the right, to sweetwater. satisfied of the bloody cost
of attacking intrenched lines, i at once thought of moving the
whole army to the railroad at a point (fulton) about ten miles
below marietta, or to the chattahoochee river itself, a movement
similar to the one afterward so successfully practised at atlanta.
all the orders were issued to bring forward supplies enough to fill
our wagons, intending to strip the railroad back to allatoona, and
leave that place as our depot, to be covered as well as possible by
garrard's cavalry. general thomas, as usual, shook his head,
deeming it risky to leave the railroad; but something had to be
done, and i had resolved on this move, as reported in my dispatch
to general halleck on july st:
general schofield is now south of olley's creek, and on the head
of nickajack. i have been hurrying down provisions and forage, and
tomorrow night propose to move mcpherson from the left to the
extreme right, back of general thomas. this will bring my right
within three miles of the chattahoochee river, and about five miles
from the railroad. by this movement i think i can force johnston to
move his whole army down from kenesaw to defend his railroad and
the chattahoochee, when i will (by the left flank) reach the
railroad below marietta; but in this i must cut loose from the
railroad with ten days' supplies in wagons. johnston may come out
of his intrenchments to attack thomas, which is exactly what i
want, for general thomas is well intrenched on a line parallel with
the enemy south of kenesaw. i think that allatoona and the line of
the etowah are strong enough for me to venture on this move. the
movement is substantially down the sandtown road straight for
atlanta.
mcpherson drew out of his lines during the night of july d,
leaving garrard's cavalry, dismounted, occupying his trenches, and
moved to the rear of the army of the cumberland, stretching down
the nickajack; but johnston detected the movement, and promptly
abandoned marietta and kenesaw. i expected as much, for, by the
earliest dawn of the d of july, i was up at a large spy-glass
mounted on a tripod, which colonel poe, united states engineers,
had at his bivouac close by our camp. i directed the glass on
kenesaw, and saw some of our pickets crawling up the hill
cautiously; soon they stood upon the very top, and i could plainly
see their movements as they ran along the crest just abandoned by
the enemy. in a minute i roused my staff, and started them off with
orders in every direction for a pursuit by every possible road,
hoping to catch johnston in the confusion of retreat, especially at
the crossing of the chattahoochee river.
i must close this chapter here, so as to give the actual losses
during june, which are compiled from the official returns by
months. these losses, from june st to july d, were all
substantially sustained about kenesaw and marietta, and it was
really a continuous battle, lasting from the th day of june till
the d of july, when the rebel army fell back from marietta toward
the chattahoochee river. our losses were:
killed and missing
wounded
total
loss in june aggregate 
johnston makes his statement of losses from the report of his
surgeon foard, for pretty much the same period, viz., from june th
to july th (page ):
killed
wounded
total
total
in the tabular statement the "missing" embraces the prisoners;
and, giving two thousand as a fair proportion of prisoners captured
by us for the month of june (twelve thousand nine hundred and
eighty-three in all the campaign), makes an aggregate loss in the
rebel army of fifty-nine hundred and forty-eight, to ours of
seventy-five hundred and thirty—a less proportion than in the
relative strength of our two armies, viz., as six to ten, thus
maintaining our relative superiority, which the desperate game of
war justified.
as before explained, on the d of july, by moving mcpherson's
entire army from the extreme left, at the base of kenesaw to the
right, below olley's creek, and stretching it down the nickajack
toward turner's ferry of the chattahoochee, we forced johnston to
choose between a direct assault on thomas's intrenched position, or
to permit us to make a lodgment on his railroad below marietta, or
even to cross the chattahoochee. of course, he chose to let go
kenesaw and marietta, and fall back on an intrenched camp prepared
by his orders in advance on the north and west bank of the
chattahoochee, covering the railroad-crossing and his several
pontoon-bridges. i confess i had not learned beforehand of the
existence of this strong place, in the nature of a tete-du-pont,
and had counted on striking him an effectual blow in the expected
confusion of his crossing the chattahoochee, a broad and deep river
then to his rear. ordering every part of the army to pursue
vigorously on the morning of the d of july, i rode into marietta,
just quitted by the rebel rear-guard, and was terribly angry at the
cautious pursuit by garrard's cavalry, and even by the head of our
infantry columns. but johnston had in advance cleared and
multiplied his roads, whereas ours had to cross at right angles
from the direction of powder springs toward marrietta, producing
delay and confusion. by night thomas's head of column ran up
against a strong rear-guard intrenched at smyrna camp-ground, six
miles below marietta, and there on the next day we celebrated our
fourth of july, by a noisy but not a desperate battle, designed
chiefly to hold the enemy there till generals mcpherson and
schofield could get well into position below him, near the
chattahoochee crossings.
it was here that general noyes, late governor of ohio, lost his
leg. i came very near being shot myself while reconnoitring in the
second story of a house on our picket-line, which was struck
several times by cannon-shot, and perfectly riddled with
musket-balls.
during the night johnston drew back all his army and trains
inside the tete-du-pont at the chattahoochee, which proved one of
the strongest pieces of field-fortification i ever saw. we closed
up against it, and were promptly met by a heavy and severe fire.
thomas was on the main road in immediate pursuit; next on his right
was schofield; and mcpherson on the extreme right, reaching the
chattahoochee river below turner's ferry. stoneman's cavalry was
still farther to the right, along down the chattahoochee river as
far as opposite sandtown; and on that day i ordered garrard's
division of cavalry up the river eighteen miles, to secure
possession of the factories at roswell, as well as to hold an
important bridge and ford at that place.
about three miles out from the chattahoochee the main road
forked, the right branch following substantially the railroad, and
the left one leading straight for atlanta, via paice's ferry and
buckhead. we found the latter unoccupied and unguarded, and the
fourth corps (howard's) reached the river at paice's ferry. the
right-hand road was perfectly covered by the tete-du-pont before
described, where the resistance was very severe, and for some time
deceived me, for i was pushing thomas with orders to fiercely
assault his enemy, supposing that he was merely opposing us to gain
time to get his trains and troops across the chattahoochee; but, on
personally reconnoitring, i saw the abatis and the strong redoubts,
which satisfied me of the preparations that had been made by
johnston in anticipation of this very event. while i was with
general jeff. c. davis, a poor negro came out of the abatis,
blanched with fright, said he had been hidden under a log all day,
with a perfect storm of shot, shells, and musket-balls, passing
over him, till a short lull had enabled him to creep out and make
himself known to our skirmishers, who in turn had sent him back to
where we were. this negro explained that he with about a thousand
slaves had been at work a month or more on these very lines, which,
as he explained, extended from the river about a mile above the
railroad-bridge to turner's ferry below,—being in extent from
five to six miles.
therefore, on the th of july we had driven our enemy to cover
in the valley of the chattahoochee, and we held possession of the
river above for eighteen miles, as far as roswell, and below ten
miles to the mouth of the sweetwater. moreover, we held the high
ground and could overlook his movements, instead of his looking
down on us, as was the case at kenesaw.
from a hill just back of mining's station i could see the houses
in atlanta, nine miles distant, and the whole intervening valley of
the chattahoochee; could observe the preparations for our reception
on the other side, the camps of men and large trains of covered
wagons; and supposed, as a matter of course, that johnston had
passed the river with the bulk of his army, and that he had only
left on our side a corps to cover his bridges; but in fact he had
only sent across his cavalry and trains. between howard's corps at
paice's ferry and the rest of thomas's army pressing up against
this tete-du-pont, was a space concealed by dense woods, in
crossing which i came near riding into a detachment of the enemy's
cavalry; and later in the same day colonel frank sherman, of
chicago, then on general howard's staff, did actually ride straight
into the enemy's camp, supposing that our lines were continuous. he
was carried to atlanta, and for some time the enemy supposed they
were in possession of the commander-in-chief of the opposing
army.
i knew that johnston would not remain long on the west bank of
the chattahoochee, for i could easily practise on that ground to
better advantage our former tactics of intrenching a moiety in his
front, and with the rest of our army cross the river and threaten
either his rear or the city of atlanta itself, which city was of
vital importance to the existence not only of his own army, but of
the confederacy itself. in my dispatch of july th to general
halleck, at washington, i state that:
johnston (in his retreat from kenesaw) has left two breaks in
the railroad—one above marietta and one near mining's
station. the former is already repaired, and johnston's army has
heard the sound of our locomotives. the telegraph is finished to
mining's station, and the field-wire has just reached my bivouac,
and will be ready to convey this message as soon as it is written
and translated into cipher.
i propose to study the crossings of the chattahoochee, and, when
all is ready, to move quickly. as a beginning, i will keep the
troops and wagons well back from the river, and only display to the
enemy our picket-line, with a few field-batteries along at random.
i have already shifted schofield to a point in our left rear,
whence he can in a single move reach the chattahoochee at a point
above the railroad-bridge, where there is a ford. at present the
waters are turbid and swollen from recent rains; but if the present
hot weather lasts, the water will run down very fast. we have
pontoons enough for four bridges, but, as our crossing will be
resisted, we must manoeuvre some. all the regular crossing-places
are covered by forts, apparently of long construction; but we shall
cross in due time, and, instead of attacking atlanta direct, or any
of its forts, i propose to make a circuit, destroying all its
railroads. this is a delicate movement, and must be done with
caution. our army is in good condition and full of confidence; but
the weather is intensely hot, and a good many men have fallen with
sunstroke. the country is high and healthy, and the sanitary
condition of the army is good.
at this time stoneman was very active on our extreme right,
pretending to be searching the river below turner's ferry for a
crossing, and was watched closely by the enemy's cavalry on the
other side, mcpherson, on the right, was equally demonstrative at
and near turner's ferry. thomas faced substantially the intrenched
tete-du-pont, and had his left on the chattahoochee river, at
paice's ferry. garrard's cavalry was up at roswell, and mccook's
small division of cavalry was intermediate, above soap's creek.
meantime, also, the railroad-construction party was hard at work,
repairing the railroad up to our camp at vining's station.
of course, i expected every possible resistance in crossing the
chattahoochee river, and had made up my mind to feign on the right,
but actually to cross over by the left. we had already secured a
crossing place at roswell, but one nearer was advisable; general
schofield had examined the river well, found a place just below the
mouth of soap's creek which he deemed advantageous, and was
instructed to effect an early crossing there, and to intrench a
good position on the other side, viz., the east bank. but,
preliminary thereto, i had ordered general rousseau, at nashville,
to collect, out of the scattered detachments of cavalry in
tennessee, a force of a couple of thousand men, to rendezvous at
decatur, alabama, thence to make a rapid march for opelika, to
break up the railroad links between georgia and alabama, and then
to make junction with me about atlanta; or, if forced, to go on to
pensacola, or even to swing across to some of our posts in
mississippi. general rousseau asked leave to command this
expedition himself, to which i consented, and on the th of july he
reported that he was all ready at decatur, and i gave him orders to
start. he moved promptly on the th, crossed the coosa below the
"ten islands" and the tallapoosa below "horseshoe bend," having
passed through talladega. he struck the railroad west of opelika,
tore it up for twenty miles, then turned north and came to marietta
on the d of july, whence he reported to me. this expedition was
in the nature of a raid, and must have disturbed the enemy
somewhat; but, as usual, the cavalry did not work hard, and their
destruction of the railroad was soon repaired. rousseau, when he
reported to me in person before atlanta, on the d of july, stated
his entire loss to have been only twelve killed and thirty wounded.
he brought in four hundred captured mules and three hundred horses,
and also told me a good story. he said he was far down in alabama,
below talladega, one hot, dusty day, when the blue clothing of his
men was gray with dust; he had halted his column along a road, and
he in person, with his staff, had gone to the house of a planter,
who met him kindly on the front-porch. he asked for water, which
was brought, and as the party sat on the porch in conversation he
saw, in a stable-yard across the road, quite a number of good
mules. he remarked to the planter, "my good sir, i fear i must take
some of your mules." the planter remonstrated, saying he had
already contributed liberally to the good cause; that it was only
last week he had given to general roddy ten mules. rousseau
replied, "well, in this war you should be at least
neutral—that is, you should be as liberal to us as to roddy"
(a rebel cavalry general). "well, ain't you on our side?" "no,"
said rousseau; "i am general rousseau, and all these men you see
are yanks." "great god! is it possible! are these yanks! who ever
supposed they would come away down here in alabama?" of course,
rousseau took his ten mules.
schofield effected his crossing at soap's creek very handsomely
on the th, capturing the small guard that was watching the
crossing. by night he was on the high ground beyond, strongly
intrenched, with two good pontoon-bridges finished, and was
prepared, if necessary, for an assault by the whole confederate
army. the same day garrard's cavalry also crossed over at roswell,
drove away the cavalry-pickets, and held its ground till relieved
by newton's division of howard's corps, which was sent up
temporarily, till it in turn was relieved by dodge's corps
(sixteenth) of the army of the tennessee, which was the advance of
the whole of that army.
that night johnston evacuated his trenches, crossed over the
chattahoochee, burned the railroad bridge and his pontoon and
trestle bridges, and left us in full possession of the north or
west bank-besides which, we had already secured possession of the
two good crossings at roswell and soap's creek. i have always
thought johnston neglected his opportunity there, for he had lain
comparatively idle while we got control of both banks of the river
above him.
on the th i ordered mcpherson, with the fifteenth corps, to
move up to roswell, to cross over, prepare good bridges, and to
make a strong tete-du-pont on the farther side. stoneman had been
sent down to campbellton, with orders to cross over and to threaten
the railroad below atlanta, if he could do so without too much
risk; and general blair, with the seventeenth corps, was to remain
at turner's ferry, demonstrating as much as possible, thus keeping
up the feint below while we were actually crossing above. thomas
was also ordered to prepare his bridges at powers's and paice's
ferries. by crossing the chattahoochee above the railroad bridge,
we were better placed to cover our railroad and depots than below,
though a movement across the river below the railroad, to the south
of atlanta, might have been more decisive. but we were already so
far from home, and would be compelled to accept battle whenever
offered, with the chattahoochee to our rear, that it became
imperative for me to take all prudential measures the case admitted
of, and i therefore determined to pass the river above the
railroad-bridge-mcpherson on the left, schofield in the centre, and
thomas on the right. on the th i reported to general halleck as
follows:
all is well. i have now accumulated stores at allatoona and
marietta, both fortified and garrisoned points. have also three
places at which to cross the chattahoochee in our possession, and
only await general stoneman's return from a trip down the river, to
cross the army in force and move on atlanta.
stoneman is now out two days, and had orders to be back on the
fourth or fifth day at furthest.
from the th to the th we were all busy in strengthening the
several points for the proposed passage of the chattahoochee, in
increasing the number and capacity of the bridges, rearranging the
garrisons to our rear, and in bringing forward supplies. on the
th general stoneman got back to powder springs, and was ordered
to replace general blair at turner's ferry, and blair, with the
seventeenth corps, was ordered up to roswell to join mcpherson. on
the th we began the general movement against atlanta, thomas
crossing the chattahoochee at powers's and paice's, by
pontoon-bridges; schofield moving out toward cross keys, and
mcpherson toward stone mountain. we encountered but little
opposition except by cavalry. on the th all the armies moved on a
general right wheel, thomas to buckhead, forming line of battle
facing peach-tree creek; schofield was on his left, and mcpherson
well over toward the railroad between stone mountain and decatur,
which he reached at  p.m. of that day, about four miles from stone
mountain, and seven miles east of decatur, and there he turned
toward atlanta, breaking up the railroad as he progressed, his
advance-guard reaching ecatur about night, where he came into
communication with schofield's troops, which had also reached
decatur. about  a.m. of that day (july th), when the armies
were all in motion, one of general thomas's staff-officers brought
me a citizen, one of our spies, who had just come out of atlanta,
and had brought a newspaper of the same day, or of the day before,
containing johnston's order relinquishing the command of the
confederate forces in atlanta, and hood's order assuming the
command. i immediately inquired of general schofield, who was his
classmate at west point, about hood, as to his general character,
etc., and learned that he was bold even to rashness, and courageous
in the extreme; i inferred that the change of commanders meant
"fight." notice of this important change was at once sent to all
parts of the army, and every division commander was cautioned to be
always prepared for battle in any shape. this was just what we
wanted, viz., to fight in open ground, on any thing like equal
terms, instead of being forced to run up against prepared
intrenchments; but, at the same time, the enemy having atlanta
behind him, could choose the time and place of attack, and could at
pleasure mass a superior force on our weakest points. therefore, we
had to be constantly ready for sallies.
on the th the three armies were converging toward atlanta,
meeting such feeble resistance that i really thought the enemy
intended to evacuate the place. mcpherson was moving astride of the
railroad, near decatur; schofield along a road leading toward
atlanta, by colonel howard's house and the distillery; and thomas
was crossing "peach-tree" in line of battle, building bridges for
nearly every division as deployed. there was quite a gap between
thomas and schofield, which i endeavored to close by drawing two of
howard's divisions nearer schofield. on the th i was with general
schofield near the centre, and soon after noon heard heavy firing
in front of thomas's right, which lasted an hour or so, and then
ceased.
i soon learned that the enemy had made a furious sally, the blow
falling on hooker's corps (the twentieth), and partially on
johnson's division of the fourteenth, and newton's of the fourth.
the troops had crossed peach-tree creek, were deployed, but at the
time were resting for noon, when, without notice, the enemy came
pouring out of their trenches down upon them, they became
commingled, and fought in many places hand to hand. general thomas
happened to be near the rear of newton's division, and got some
field-batteries in a good position, on the north side of peach-tree
creek, from which he directed a furious fire on a mass of the
enemy, which was passing around newton's left and exposed flank.
after a couple of hours of hard and close conflict, the enemy
retired slowly within his trenches, leaving his dead and many
wounded on the field. johnson's and newton's losses were light, for
they had partially covered their fronts with light parapet; but
hooker's whole corps fought in open ground, and lost about fifteen
hundred men. he reported four hundred rebel dead left on the
ground, and that the rebel wounded would number four thousand; but
this was conjectural, for most of them got back within their own
lines. we had, however, met successfully a bold sally, had repelled
it handsomely, and were also put on our guard; and the event
illustrated the future tactics of our enemy. this sally came from
the peach-tree line, which general johnston had carefully prepared
in advance, from which to fight us outside of atlanta. we then
advanced our lines in compact order, close up to these finished
intrenchments, overlapping them on our left. from various parts of
our lines the houses inside of atlanta were plainly visible, though
between us were the strong parapets, with ditch, fraise,
chevaux-de-frise, and abatis, prepared long in advance by colonel
jeremy f. gilmer, formerly of the united states engineers.
mcpherson had the fifteenth corps astride the augusta railroad, and
the seventeenth deployed on its left. schofield was next on his
right, then came howard's, hooker's, and palmer's corps, on the
extreme right. each corps was deployed with strong reserves, and
their trains were parked to their rear. mcpherson's trains were in
decatur, guarded by a brigade commanded by colonel sprague of the
sixty-third ohio. the sixteenth corps (dodge's) was crowded out of
position on the right of mcpherson's line, by the contraction of
the circle of investment; and, during the previous afternoon, the
seventeenth corps (blair's) had pushed its operations on the
farther side of the augusta railroad, so as to secure possession of
a hill, known as leggett's hill, which leggett's and force's
divisions had carried by assault. giles a. smith's division was on
leggett's left, deployed with a weak left flank "in air," in
military phraseology. the evening before general gresham, a great
favorite, was badly wounded; and there also colonel tom reynolds,
now of madison, wisconsin, was shot through the leg. when the
surgeons were debating the propriety of amputating it in his
hearing, he begged them to spare the leg, as it was very valuable,
being an "imported leg." he was of irish birth, and this well-timed
piece of wit saved his leg, for the surgeons thought, if he could
perpetrate a joke at such a time, they would trust to his vitality
to save his limb.
during the night, i had full reports from all parts of our line,
most of which was partially intrenched as against a sally, and
finding that mcpherson was stretching out too much on his left
flank, i wrote him a note early in the morning not to extend so
much by his left; for we had not troops enough to completely invest
the place, and i intended to destroy utterly all parts of the
augusta railroad to the east of atlanta, then to withdraw from the
left flank and add to the right. in that letter i ordered mcpherson
not to extend any farther to the left, but to employ general
dodge's corps (sixteenth), then forced out of position, to destroy
every rail and tie of the railroad, from decatur up to his
skirmish-line, and i wanted him (mcpherson) to be ready, as soon as
general garrard returned from covington (whither i had sent him),
to move to the extreme right of thomas, so as to reach if possible
the railroad below atlanta, viz., the macon road. in the morning we
found the strong line of parapet, "peach-tree line," to the front
of schofield and thomas, abandoned, and our lines were advanced
rapidly close up to atlanta. for some moments i supposed the enemy
intended to evacuate, and in person was on horseback at the head of
schofield's troops, who had advanced in front of the howard house
to some open ground, from which we could plainly see the whole
rebel line of parapets, and i saw their men dragging up from the
intervening valley, by the distillery, trees and saplings for
abatis. our skirmishers found the enemy down in this valley, and we
could see the rebel main line strongly manned, with guns in
position at intervals. schofield was dressing forward his lines,
and i could hear thomas farther to the right engaged, when general
mcpherson and his staff rode up. we went back to the howard house,
a double frame-building with a porch, and sat on the steps,
discussing the chances of battle, and of hood's general character.
mcpherson had also been of the same class at west point with hood,
schofield, and sheridan. we agreed that we ought to be unusually
cautious and prepared at all times for sallies and for hard
fighting, because hood, though not deemed much of a scholar, or of
great mental capacity, was undoubtedly a brave, determined, and
rash man; and the change of commanders at that particular crisis
argued the displeasure of the confederate government with the
cautious but prudent conduct of general jos. johnston.
mcpherson was in excellent spirits, well pleased at the progress
of events so far, and had come over purposely to see me about the
order i had given him to use dodge's corps to break up the
railroad, saying that the night before he had gained a position on
leggett's hill from which he could look over the rebel parapet, and
see the high smoke-stack of a large foundery in atlanta; that
before receiving my order he had diverted dodge's two divisions
(then in motion) from the main road, along a diagonal one that led
to his extreme left flank, then held by giles a. smith's division
(seventeenth corps), for the purpose of strengthening that flank;
and that he had sent some intrenching-tools there, to erect some
batteries from which he intended to knock down that foundery, and
otherwise to damage the buildings inside of atlanta. he said he
could put all his pioneers to work, and do with them in the time
indicated all i had proposed to do with general dodge's two
divisions. of course i assented at once, and we walked down the
road a short distance, sat down by the foot of a tree where i had
my map, and on it pointed out to him thomas's position and his own.
i then explained minutely that, after we had sufficiently broken up
the augusta road, i wanted to shift his whole army around by the
rear to thomas's extreme right, and hoped thus to reach the other
railroad at east point. while we sat there we could hear lively
skirmishing going on near us (down about the distillery), and
occasionally round-shot from twelve or twenty-four pound guns came
through the trees in reply to those of schofield, and we could hear
similar sounds all along down the lines of thomas to our right, and
his own to the left; but presently the firing appeared a little
more brisk (especially over about giles g. smith's division), and
then we heard an occasional gun back toward decatur. i asked him
what it meant. we took my pocket-compass (which i always carried),
and by noting the direction of the sound, we became satisfied that
the firing was too far to our left rear to be explained by known
facts, and he hastily called for his horse, his staff, and his
orderlies.
mcpherson was then in his prime (about thirty-four years old),
over six feet high, and a very handsome man in every way, was
universally liked, and had many noble qualities. he had on his
boots outside his pantaloons, gauntlets on his hands, had on his
major-general's uniform, and wore a sword-belt, but no sword. he
hastily gathered his papers (save one, which i now possess) into a
pocket-book, put it in his breast-pocket, and jumped on his horse,
saying he would hurry down his line and send me back word what
these sounds meant. his adjutant-general, clark, inspector-general
strong, and his aides, captains steele and gile, were with him.
although the sound of musketry on our left grew in volume, i was
not so much disturbed by it as by the sound of artillery back
toward decatur. i ordered schofield at once to send a brigade back
to decatur (some five miles) and was walking up and down the porch
of the howard house, listening, when one of mcpherson's staff, with
his horse covered with sweat, dashed up to the porch, and reported
that general mcpherson was either "killed or a prisoner." he
explained that when they had left me a few minutes before, they had
ridden rapidly across to the railroad, the sounds of battle
increasing as they neared the position occupied by general giles a.
smith's division, and that mcpherson had sent first one, then
another of his staff to bring some of the reserve brigades of the
fifteenth corps over to the exposed left flank; that he had reached
the head of dodge's corps (marching by the flank on the diagonal
road as described), and had ordered it to hurry forward to the same
point; that then, almost if not entirely alone, he had followed
this road leading across the wooded valley behind the seventeenth
corps, and had disappeared in these woods, doubtless with a sense
of absolute security. the sound of musketry was there heard, and
mcpherson's horse came back, bleeding, wounded, and riderless. i
ordered the staff-officer who brought this message to return at
once, to find general logan (the senior officer present with the
army of the tennessee), to report the same facts to him, and to
instruct him to drive back this supposed small force, which had
evidently got around the seventeenth corps through the blind woods
in rear of our left flank. i soon dispatched one of my own staff
(mccoy, i think) to general logan with similar orders, telling him
to refuse his left flank, and to fight the battle (holding fast to
leggett's hill) with the army of the tennessee; that i would
personally look to decatur and to the safety of his rear, and would
reenforce him if he needed it. i dispatched orders to general
thomas on our right, telling him of this strong sally, and my
inference that the lines in his front had evidently been weakened
by reason thereof, and that he ought to take advantage of the
opportunity to make a lodgment in atlanta, if possible.
meantime the sounds of the battle rose on our extreme left more
and more furious, extending to the place where i stood, at the
howard house. within an hour an ambulance came in (attended by
colonels clark and strong, and captains steele and gile), bearing
mcpherson's body. i had it carried inside of the howard house, and
laid on a door wrenched from its hinges. dr. hewitt, of the army,
was there, and i asked him to examine the wound. he opened the coat
and shirt, saw where the ball had entered and where it came out, or
rather lodged under the skin, and he reported that mcpherson must
have died in a few seconds after being hit; that the ball had
ranged upward across his body, and passed near the heart. he was
dressed just as he left me, with gauntlets and boots on, but his
pocket-book was gone. on further inquiry i learned that his body
must have been in possession of the enemy some minutes, during
which time it was rifled of the pocket-book, and i was much
concerned lest the letter i had written him that morning should
have fallen into the hands of some one who could read and
understand its meaning. fortunately the spot in the woods where
mcpherson was shot was regained by our troops in a few minutes, and
the pocket-book found in the haversack of a prisoner of war
captured at the time, and it and its contents were secured by one
of mcpherson's staff.
while we were examining the body inside the house, the battle
was progressing outside, and many shots struck the building, which
i feared would take fire; so i ordered captains steele and gile to
carry the body to marietta. they reached that place the same night,
and, on application, i ordered his personal staff to go on and
escort the body to his home, in clyde, ohio, where it was received
with great honor, and it is now buried in a small cemetery, close
by his mother's house, which cemetery is composed in part of the
family orchard, in which he used to play when a boy. the foundation
is ready laid for the equestrian monument now in progress, under
the auspices of the society of the army of the tennessee.
the reports that came to me from all parts of the field revealed
clearly what was the game of my antagonist, and the ground somewhat
favored him. the railroad and wagon-road from decatur to atlanta
lie along the summit, from which the waters flow, by short, steep
valleys, into the "peach-tree" and chattahoochee, to the west, and
by other valleys, of gentler declivity, toward the east (ocmulgee).
the ridges and level ground were mostly cleared, and had been
cultivated as corn or cotton fields; but where the valleys were
broken, they were left in a state of nature—wooded, and full
of undergrowth. mcpherson's line of battle was across this
railroad, along a general ridge, with a gentle but cleared valley
to his front, between him and the defenses of atlanta; and another
valley, behind him, was clear of timber in part, but to his left
rear the country was heavily wooded. hood, during the night of july
st, had withdrawn from his peach-tree line, had occupied the
fortified line of atlanta, facing north and east, with
stewart's—formerly polk's—corps and part of hardee's,
and with g. w. smith's division of militia. his own corps, and part
of hardee's, had marched out to the road leading from mcdonough to
decatur, and had turned so as to strike the left and, rear of
mcpherson's line "in air." at the same time he had sent wheeler's
division of cavalry against the trains parked in decatur. unluckily
for us, i had sent away the whole of garrard's division of cavalry
during the night of the th, with orders to proceed to covington,
thirty miles east, to burn two important bridges across the
ulcofauhatchee and yellow rivers, to tear up the railroad, to
damage it as much as possible from stone mountain eastward, and to
be gone four days; so that mcpherson had no cavalry in hand to
guard that flank.
the enemy was therefore enabled, under cover or the forest, to
approach quite near before he was discovered; indeed, his
skirmish-line had worked through the timber and got into the field
to the rear of giles a. smith's division of the seventeenth corps
unseen, had captured murray's battery of regular artillery, moving
through these woods entirely unguarded, and had got possession of
several of the hospital camps. the right of this rebel line struck
dodge's troops in motion; but, fortunately, this corps (sixteenth)
had only to halt, face to the left, and was in line of battle; and
this corps not only held in check the enemy, but drove him back
through the woods. about the same time this same force had struck
general giles a. smith's left flank, doubled it back, captured four
guns in position and the party engaged in building the very battery
which was the special object of mcpherson's visit to me, and almost
enveloped the entire left flank. the men, however, were skillful
and brave, and fought for a time with their backs to atlanta. they
gradually fell back, compressing their own line, and gaining
strength by making junction with leggett's division of the
seventeenth corps, well and strongly posted on the hill. one or two
brigades of the fifteenth corps, ordered by mcpherson, came rapidly
across the open field to the rear, from the direction of the
railroad, filled up the gap from blair's new left to the head of
dodge's column—now facing to the general left—thus
forming a strong left flank, at right angles to the original line
of battle. the enemy attacked, boldly and repeatedly, the whole of
this flank, but met an equally fierce resistance; and on that
ground a bloody battle raged from little after noon till into the
night. a part of hood's plan of action was to sally from atlanta at
the same moment; but this sally was not, for some reason,
simultaneous, for the first attack on our extreme left flank had
been checked and repulsed before the sally came from the direction
of atlanta. meantime, colonel sprague, in decatur, had got his
teams harnessed up, and safely conducted his train to the rear of
schofield's position, holding in check wheeler's cavalry till he
had got off all his trains, with the exception of three or four
wagons. i remained near the howard house, receiving reports and
sending orders, urging generals thomas and schofield to take
advantage of the absence from their front of so considerable a body
as was evidently engaged on our left, and, if possible, to make a
lodgment in atlanta itself; but they reported that the lines to
their front, at all accessible points, were strong, by nature and
by art, and were fully manned. about  p.m. the expected, sally
came from atlanta, directed mainly against leggett's hill and along
the decatur road. at leggett's hill they were met and bloodily
repulsed. along the railroad they were more successful. sweeping
over a small force with two guns, they reached our main line, broke
through it, and got possession of de gress's battery of four
twenty-pound parrotts, killing every horse, and turning the guns
against us. general charles r. wood's division of the fifteenth
corps was on the extreme right of the army of the tennessee,
between the railroad and the howard house, where he connected with
schofield's troops. he reported to me in person that the line on
his left had been swept back, and that his connection with general
logan, on leggett's hill, was broken. i ordered him to wheel his
brigades to the left, to advance in echelon, and to catch the enemy
in flank. general schofield brought forward all his available
batteries, to the number of twenty guns, to a position to the left
front of the howard house, whence we could overlook the field of
action, and directed a heavy fire over the heads of general wood's
men against the enemy; and we saw wood's troops advance and
encounter the enemy, who had secured possession of the old line of
parapet which had been held by our men. his right crossed this
parapet, which he swept back, taking it in flank; and, at the same
time, the division which had been driven back along the railroad
was rallied by general logan in person, and fought for their former
ground. these combined forces drove the enemy into atlanta,
recovering the twenty pound parrott guns but one of them was found
"bursted" while in the possession of the enemy. the two
six-pounders farther in advance were, however, lost, and had been
hauled back by the enemy into atlanta. poor captain de gress came
to me in tears, lamenting the loss of his favorite guns; when they
were regained he had only a few men left, and not a single horse.
he asked an order for a reequipment, but i told him he must beg and
borrow of others till he could restore his battery, now reduced to
three guns. how he did so i do not know, but in a short time he did
get horses, men, and finally another gun, of the same special
pattern, and served them with splendid effect till the very close
of the war. this battery had also been with me from shiloh till
that time.
the battle of july d is usually called the battle of atlanta.
it extended from the howard house to general giles a. smith's
position, about a mile beyond the augusta railroad, and then back
toward decatur, the whole extent of ground being fully seven miles.
in part the ground was clear and in part densely wooded. i rode
over the whole of it the next day, and it bore the marks of a
bloody conflict. the enemy had retired during the night inside of
atlanta, and we remained masters of the situation outside. i
purposely allowed the army of the tennessee to fight this battle
almost unaided, save by demonstrations on the part of general
schofield and thomas against the fortified lines to their immediate
fronts, and by detaching, as described, one of schofield's brigades
to decatur, because i knew that the attacking force could only be a
part of hood's army, and that, if any assistance were rendered by
either of the other armies, the army of the tennessee would be
jealous. nobly did they do their work that day, and terrible was
the slaughter done to our enemy, though at sad cost to ourselves,
as shown by the following reports:
in the field near atlanta, july ,.
general halleck, washington, d. c.
yesterday morning the enemy fell back to the intrenchments proper
of the city of atlanta, which are in a general circle, with a
radius of one and a half miles, and we closed in. while we were
forming our lines, and selecting positions for our batteries, the
enemy appeared suddenly out of the dense woods in heavy masses on
our extreme left, and struck the seventeenth corps (general blair)
in flank, and was forcing it back, when the sixteenth corps
(general dodge) came up and checked the movement, but the enemy's
cavalry got well to our rear, and into decatur, and for some hours
our left flank was completely enveloped. the fight that resulted
was continuous until night, with heavy loss on both sides. the
enemy took one of our batteries (murray's, of the regular army)
that was marching in its place in column in the road, unconscious
of danger. about  p.m. the enemy sallied against the division of
general morgan l. smith, of the fifteenth corps, which occupied an
abandoned line of rifle-trench near the railroad east of the city,
and forced it back some four hundred yards, leaving in his hands
for the time two batteries, but the ground and batteries were
immediately after recovered by the same troops reenforced. i cannot
well approximate our loss, which fell heavily on the fifteenth and
seventeenth corps, but count it as three thousand; i know that,
being on the defensive, we have inflicted equally heavy loss on the
enemy.
general mcpherson, when arranging his troops about . a.m., and
passing from one column to another, incautiously rode upon an
ambuscade without apprehension, at some distance ahead of his staff
and orderlies, and was shot dead.
w. t. sherman, major-general commanding.
atlanta, july ,.
major-general halleck, washington, d. c.
general: i find it difficult to make prompt report of results,
coupled with some data or information, without occasionally making
mistakes. mcpherson's sudden death, and logan succeeding to the
command as it were in the midst of battle, made some confusion on
our extreme left; but it soon recovered and made sad havoc with the
enemy, who had practised one of his favorite games of attacking our
left when in motion, and before it had time to cover its weak
flank. after riding over the ground and hearing the varying
statements of the actors, i directed general logan to make an
official report of the actual result, and i herewith inclose
it.
though the number of dead rebels seems excessive, i am disposed to
give full credit to the report that our loss, though only
thirty-five hundred and twenty-one killed, wounded, and missing,
the enemy's dead alone on the field nearly equaled that number,
viz., thirty-two hundred and twenty. happening at that point of the
line when a flag of truce was sent in to ask permission for each
party to bury its dead, i gave general logan authority to permit a
temporary truce on that flank alone, while our labors and fighting
proceeded at all others.
i also send you a copy of general garrard's report of the breaking
of the railroad toward augusta. i am now grouping my command to
attack the macon road, and with that view will intrench a strong
line of circumvallation with flanks, so as to have as large an
infantry column as possible, with all the cavalry to swing round to
the south and east, to strike that road at or below east
point.
i have the honor to be, your obedient servant,
w. t. sherman, major-general commanding.
before atlanta georgia, july , 
major-general w. t. sherman, commanding military division of the
mississippi.
general: i have the honor to report the following general summary
of the result of the attack of the enemy on this army on the d
inst.
total loss, killed, wounded, and missing, thirty-five hundred and
twenty-one, and ten pieces of artillery.
we have buried and delivered to the enemy, under a flag of truce
sent in by them, in front of the third division, seventeenth corps,
one thousand of their killed.
the number of their dead in front of the fourth division of the
same corps, including those on the ground not now occupied by our
troops, general blair reports, will swell the number of their dead
on his front to two thousand.
the number of their dead buried in front of the fifteenth corps, up
to this hour, is three hundred and sixty, and the commanding
officer reports that at least as many more are yet unburied;
burying-parties being still at work.
the number of dead buried in front of the sixteenth corps is four
hundred and twenty-two. we have over one thousand of their wounded
in our hands, the larger number of the wounded being carried off
during the night, after the engagement, by them.
we captured eighteen stands of colors, and have them now. we also
captured five thousand stands of arms.
the attack was made on our lines seven times, and was seven times
repulsed. hood's and hardee's corps and wheeler's cavalry engaged
us.
we have sent to the rear one thousand prisoners, including
thirty-three commissioned officers of high rank.
we still occupy the field, and the troops are in fine spirits. a
detailed and full report will be furnished as soon as
completed.
recapitulation.
our total loss
enemy's dead, thus far reported, buried,
and delivered to them
total prisoners sent north
total prisoners, wounded, in our hands
estimated loss of the enemy, at least
very respectfully, your obedient servant,
joan a. logan, major-general.
on the d of july general rousseau reached marietta, having
returned from his raid on the alabama road at opelika, and on the
next day general garrard also returned from covington, both having
been measurably successful. the former was about twenty-five
hundred strong, the latter about four thousand, and both reported
that their horses were jaded and tired, needing shoes and rest.
but, about this time, i was advised by general grant (then
investing richmond) that the rebel government had become aroused to
the critical condition of things about atlanta, and that i must
look out for hood being greatly reenforced. i therefore was
resolved to push matters, and at once set about the original
purpose of transferring the whole of the army of the tennessee to
our right flank, leaving schofield to stretch out so as to rest his
left on the augusta road, then torn up for thirty miles eastward;
and, as auxiliary thereto, i ordered all the cavalry to be ready to
pass around atlanta on both flanks, to break up the macon road at
some point below, so as to cut off all supplies to the rebel army
inside, and thus to force it to evacuate, or come out and fight us
on equal terms.
but it first became necessary to settle the important question
of who should succeed general mcpherson? general logan had taken
command of the army of the tennessee by virtue of his seniority,
and had done well; but i did not consider him equal to the command
of three corps. between him and general blair there existed a
natural rivalry. both were men of great courage and talent, but
were politicians by nature and experience, and it may be that for
this reason they were mistrusted by regular officers like generals
schofield, thomas, and myself. it was all-important that there
should exist a perfect understanding among the army commanders, and
at a conference with general george h. thomas at the headquarters
of general thomas j. woods, commanding a division in the fourth
corps, he (thomas) remonstrated warmly against my recommending that
general logan should be regularly assigned to the command of the
army of the tennessee by reason of his accidental seniority. we
discussed fully the merits and qualities of every officer of high
rank in the army, and finally settled on major-general o. o. howard
as the best officer who was present and available for the purpose;
on the th of july i telegraphed to general halleck this
preference, and it was promptly ratified by the president. general
howard's place in command of the fourth corps was filled by general
stanley, one of his division commanders, on the recommendation of
general thomas. all these promotions happened to fall upon
west-pointers, and doubtless logan and blair had some reason to
believe that we intended to monopolize the higher honors of the war
for the regular officers. i remember well my own thoughts and
feelings at the time, and feel sure that i was not intentionally
partial to any class, i wanted to succeed in taking atlanta, and
needed commanders who were purely and technically soldiers, men who
would obey orders and execute them promptly and on time; for i knew
that we would have to execute some most delicate manoeuvres,
requiring the utmost skill, nicety, and precision. i believed that
general howard would do all these faithfully and well, and i think
the result has justified my choice. i regarded both generals logan
and blair as "volunteers," that looked to personal fame and glory
as auxiliary and secondary to their political ambition, and not as
professional soldiers.
as soon as it was known that general howard had been chosen to
command the army of the tennessee; general hooker applied to
general thomas to be relieved of the command of the twentieth
corps, and general thomas forwarded his application to me approved
and heartily recommended. i at once telegraphed to general halleck,
recommending general slocum (then at vicksburg) to be his
successor, because slocum had been displaced from the command of
his corps at the time when the eleventh and twelfth were united and
made the twentieth.
general hooker was offended because he was not chosen to succeed
mcpherson; but his chances were not even considered; indeed, i had
never been satisfied with him since his affair at the gulp house,
and had been more than once disposed to relieve him of his corps,
because of his repeated attempts to interfere with generals
mcpherson and schofield. i had known hooker since , and was
intimately associated with him in california, where we served
together on the staff of general persifer f. smith. he had come to
us from the east with a high reputation as a "fighter," which he
had fully justified at chattanooga and peach-tree creek; at which
latter battle i complimented him on the field for special
gallantry, and afterward in official reports. still, i did feel a
sense of relief when he left us. we were then two hundred and fifty
miles in advance of our base, dependent on a single line of
railroad for our daily food. we had a bold, determined foe in our
immediate front, strongly intrenched, with communication open to
his rear for supplies and reenforcements, and every soldier
realized that we had plenty of hard fighting ahead, and that all
honors had to be fairly earned.
until general slocum joined (in the latter part of august), the
twentieth corps was commanded by general a. s. williams, the senior
division commander present. on the th of july the army,
therefore, stood thus: the army of the tennessee (general o. o.
howard commanding) was on the left, pretty much on the same ground
it had occupied during the battle of the d, all ready to move
rapidly by the rear to the extreme right beyond proctor's creek;
the army of the ohio (general schofield) was next in order, with
its left flank reaching the augusta railroad; next in order,
conforming closely with the rebel intrenchments of atlanta, was
general thomas's army of the cumberland, in the order of—the
fourth corps (stanley's), the twentieth corps (williams's), and the
fourteenth corps (palmer's). palmer's right division (jefferson c.
davis's) was strongly refused along proctor's creek. this line was
about five miles long, and was intrenched as against a sally about
as strong as was our enemy. the cavalry was assembled in two strong
divisions; that of mccook (including the brigade of harrison which
had been brought in from opelika by general rousseau) numbered
about thirty-five hundred effective cavalry, and was posted to our
right rear, at turner's ferry, where we had a good pontoon-bridge;
and to our left rear, at and about decatur, were the two cavalry
divisions of stoneman, twenty-five hundred, and garrard, four
thousand, united for the time and occasion under the command of
major-general george stoneman, a cavalry-officer of high repute. my
plan of action was to move the army of the tennessee to the right
rapidly and boldly against the railroad below atlanta, and at the
same time to send all the cavalry around by the right and left to
make a lodgment on the macon road about jonesboro.
all the orders were given, and the morning of the th was fixed
for commencing the movement. on the th i received from general
stoneman a note asking permission (after having accomplished his
orders to break up the railroad at jonesboro) to go on to macon to
rescue our prisoners of war known to be held there, and then to
push on to andersonville, where was the great depot of union
prisoners, in which were penned at one time as many as twenty-three
thousand of our men, badly fed and harshly treated. i wrote him an
answer consenting substantially to his proposition, only modifying
it by requiring him to send back general garrard's division to its
position on our left flank after he had broken up the railroad at
jonesboro. promptly, and on time, all got off, and general dodge's
corps (the sixteenth, of the army of the tennessee) reached its
position across proctor's creek the same evening, and early the
next morning (the th) blair's corps (the seventeenth) deployed on
his right, both corps covering their front with the usual parapet;
the fifteenth corps (general logan's) came up that morning on the
right of blair, strongly refused, and began to prepare the usual
cover. as general jeff. c. davis's division was, as it were, left
out of line, i ordered it on the evening before to march down
toward turner's ferry, and then to take a road laid down on our
maps which led from there toward east point, ready to engage any
enemy that might attack our general right flank, after the same
manner as had been done to the left flank on the d.
personally on the morning of the th i followed the movement,
and rode to the extreme right, where we could hear some skirmishing
and an occasional cannon-shot. as we approached the ground held by
the fifteenth corps, a cannon-ball passed over my shoulder and
killed the horse of an orderly behind; and seeing that this gun
enfiladed the road by which we were riding, we turned out of it and
rode down into a valley, where we left our horses and walked up to
the hill held by morgan l. smith's division of the fifteenth corps.
near a house i met generals howard and logan, who explained that
there was an intrenched battery to their front, with the appearance
of a strong infantry support. i then walked up to the ridge, where
i found general morgan l. smith. his men were deployed and engaged
in rolling logs and fence-rails, preparing a hasty cover. from this
ridge we could overlook the open fields near a meeting-house known
as "ezra church," close by the poor-house. we could see the fresh
earth of a parapet covering some guns (that fired an occasional
shot), and there was also an appearance of activity beyond. general
smith was in the act of sending forward a regiment from, his right
flank to feel the position of the enemy, when i explained to him
and to generals logan and howard that they must look out for
general jeff. c. davis's division, which was coming up from the
direction of turner's ferry.
as the skirmish-fire warmed up along the front of blair's corps,
as well as along the fifteenth corps (logan's), i became convinced
that hood designed to attack this right flank, to prevent, if
possible, the extension of our line in that direction. i regained
my horse, and rode rapidly back to see that davis's division had
been dispatched as ordered. i found general davis in person, who
was unwell, and had sent his division that morning early, under the
command of his senior brigadier, morgan; but, as i attached great
importance to the movement, he mounted his horse, and rode away to
overtake and to hurry forward the movement, so as to come up on the
left rear of the enemy, during the expected battle.
by this time the sound of cannon and musketry denoted a severe
battle as in progress, which began seriously at . a.m., and
ended substantially by  p.m. it was a fierce attack by the enemy
on our extreme right flank, well posted and partially covered. the
most authentic account of the battle is given by general logan, who
commanded the fifteenth corps, in his official report to the
adjutant-general of the army of the tennessee, thus:
before atlanta, georgia, july , 
lieutenant-colonel william t. clark, assistant adjutant-general,
army of the tennessee, present.
colonel: i have the honor to report that, in pursuance of orders, i
moved my command into position on the right of the seventeenth
corps, which was the extreme right of the army in the field, during
the night of the th and morning of the th; and, while advancing
in line of battle to a more favorable position, we were met by the
rebel infantry of hardee's and lee's corps, who made a determined
and desperate attack on us at  a.m. of the th
(yesterday).
my lines were only protected by logs and rails, hastily thrown up
in front of them.
the first onset was received and checked, and the battle commenced
and lasted until about three o'clock in the evening. during that
time six successive charges were made, which were six times
gallantly repulsed, each time with fearful loss to the enemy.
later in the evening my lines were several times assaulted
vigorously, but each time with like result. the worst of the
fighting occurred on general harrow's and morgan l. smith's fronts,
which formed the centre and right of the corps. the troops could
not have displayed greater courage, nor greater determination not
to give ground; had they shown less, they would have been driven
from their position.
brigadier-generals c. r. woods, harrow, and morgan l. smith,
division commanders, are entitled to equal credit for gallant
conduct and skill in repelling the assault. my thanks are due to
major-generals blair and dodge for sending me reenforeements at a
time when they were much needed. my losses were fifty killed, four
hundred and forty-nine wounded, and seventy-three missing:
aggregate, five hundred and seventy-two.
the division of general harrow captured five battle-flags. there
were about fifteen hundred or two thousand muskets left on the
ground. one hundred and six prisoners were captured, exclusive of
seventy-three wounded, who were sent to our hospital, and are being
cared for by our surgeons. five hundred and sixty-five rebels have
up to this time been buried, and about two hundred are supposed to
be yet unburied. a large number of their wounded were undoubtedly
carried away in the night, as the enemy did not withdraw till near
daylight. the enemy's loss could not have been less than six or
seven thousand men. a more detailed report will hereafter be
made.
i am, very respectfully,
your obedient servant,
major-general, commanding fifteenth army corps.
general howard, in transmitting this report, added:
i wish to express my high gratification with the conduct of the
troops engaged. i never saw better conduct in battle. general
logan, though ill and much worn out, was indefatigable, and the
success of the day is as much attributable to him as to any one
man.
this was, of coarse, the first fight in which general howard had
commanded the army of the tennessee, and he evidently aimed to
reconcile general logan in his disappointment, and to gain the
heart of his army, to which he was a stranger. he very properly
left general logan to fight his own corps, but exposed himself
freely; and, after the firing had ceased, in the afternoon he
walked the lines; the men, as reported to me, gathered about him in
the most affectionate way, and he at once gained their respect and
confidence. to this fact i at the time attached much importance,
for it put me at ease as to the future conduct of that most
important army.
at no instant of time did i feel the least uneasiness about the
result on the th, but wanted to reap fuller results, hoping that
davis's division would come up at the instant of defeat, and catch
the enemy in flank; but the woods were dense, the roads obscure,
and as usual this division got on the wrong road, and did not come
into position until about dark. in like manner, i thought that hood
had greatly weakened his main lines inside of atlanta, and
accordingly sent repeated orders to schofield and thomas to make an
attempt to break in; but both reported that they found the parapets
very strong and full manned.
our men were unusually encouraged by this day's work, for they
realized that we could compel hood to come out from behind his
fortified lines to attack us at a disadvantage. in conversation
with me, the soldiers of the fifteenth corps, with whom i was on
the most familiar terms, spoke of the affair of the th as the
easiest thing in the world; that, in fact, it was a common
slaughter of the enemy; they pointed out where the rebel lines had
been, and how they themselves had fired deliberately, had shot down
their antagonists, whose bodies still lay unburied, and marked
plainly their lines of battle, which must have halted within easy
musket-range of our men, who were partially protected by their
improvised line of logs and fence-rails. all bore willing testimony
to the courage and spirit of the foe, who, though repeatedly
repulsed, came back with increased determination some six or more
times.
the next morning the fifteenth corps wheeled forward to the left
over the battle-field of the day before, and davis's division still
farther prolonged the line, which reached nearly to the
ever-to-be-remembered "sandtown road."
then, by further thinning out thomas's line, which was well
entrenched, i drew another division of palmer's corps (baird's)
around to the right, to further strengthen that flank. i was
impatient to hear from the cavalry raid, then four days out, and
was watching for its effect, ready to make a bold push for the
possession of east point. general garrard's division returned to
decatur on the st, and reported that general stoneman had posted
him at flat rock, while he (stoneman) went on. the month of july
therefore closed with our infantry line strongly entrenched, but
drawn out from the augusta road on the left to the sandtown road on
the right, a distance of full ten measured miles.
the enemy, though evidently somewhat intimidated by the results
of their defeats on the d and th, still presented a bold front
at all points, with fortified lines that defied a direct assault.
our railroad was done to the rear of our camps, colonel w. p.
wright having reconstructed the bridge across the chattahoochee in
six days; and our garrisons and detachments to the rear had so
effectually guarded the railroad that the trains from nashville
arrived daily, and our substantial wants were well supplied.
the month, though hot in the extreme, had been one of constant
conflict, without intermission, and on four several occasions
—viz., july th, th, d, and th—these affairs had
amounted to real battles, with casualty lists by the thousands.
assuming the correctness of the rebel surgeon foard's report, on
page  of johnston's "narrative," commencing with july th and
terminating with july st, we have:
aggregate loss of the enemy......... ,
our losses, as compiled from the official returns for july,
, are:
killed and missing.
wounded.
total.
aggregate loss of july
in this table the column of "killed and missing" embraces the
prisoners that fell into the hands of the enemy, mostly lost in the
seventeenth corps, on the d of july, and does not embrace the
losses in the cavalry divisions of garrard and mccook, which,
however, were small for july. in all other respects the statement
is absolutely correct. i am satisfied, however, that surgeon foard
could not have been in possession of data sufficiently accurate to
enable him to report the losses in actual battle of men who never
saw the hospital. during the whole campaign i had rendered to me
tri-monthly statements of "effective strength," from which i
carefully eliminated the figures not essential for my conduct, so
that at all times i knew the exact fighting-strength of each corps,
division, and brigade, of the whole army, and also endeavored to
bear in mind our losses both on the several fields of battle and by
sickness, and well remember that i always estimated that during the
month of july we had inflicted heavier loss on the enemy than we
had sustained ourselves, and the above figures prove it
conclusively. before closing this chapter, i must record one or two
minor events that occurred about this time, that may prove of
interest.
on the th of july i received a dispatch from inspector-general
james a. hardie, then on duty at the war department in washington,
to the effect that generals osterhaus and alvan p. hovey had been
appointed major-generals. both of these had begun the campaign with
us in command of divisions, but had gone to the rear—the
former by reason of sickness, and the latter dissatisfied with
general schofield and myself about the composition of his division
of the twenty-third corps. both were esteemed as first-class
officers, who had gained special distinction in the vicksburg
campaign. but up to that time, when the newspapers announced daily
promotions elsewhere, no prominent officers serving with me had
been advanced a peg, and i felt hurt. i answered hardie on the
th, in a dispatch which has been made public, closing with this
language: "if the rear be the post of honor, then we had better all
change front on washington." to my amazement, in a few days i
received from president lincoln himself an answer, in which he
caught me fairly. i have not preserved a copy of that dispatch, and
suppose it was burned up in the chicago fire; but it was
characteristic of mr. lincoln, and was dated the th or th day
of july, contained unequivocal expressions of respect for those who
were fighting hard and unselfishly, offering us a full share of the
honors and rewards of the war, and saying that, in the cases of
hovey and osterhaus, he was influenced mainly by the
recommendations of generals grant and sherman. on the th i
replied direct, apologizing somewhat for my message to general
hardie, saying that i did not suppose such messages ever reached
him personally, explaining that general grant's and sherman's
recommendations for hovey and osterhaus had been made when the
events of the vicksburg campaign were fresh with us, and that my
dispatch of the th to general hardie had reflected chiefly the
feelings of the officers then present with me before atlanta. the
result of all this, however, was good, for another dispatch from
general hardie, of the th, called on me to nominate eight
colonels for promotion as brigadier-generals. i at once sent a
circular note to the army-commanders to nominate two colonels from
the army of the ohio and three from each of the others; and the
result was, that on the th of july i telegraphed the names of
—colonel william gross, thirty-sixth indiana; colonel charles
c. walcutt, forty-sixth ohio; colonel james w. riley, one hundred
and fourth ohio; colonel l. p. bradley, fifty-first illinois;
colonel j. w. sprague, sixty-third ohio; colonel joseph a. cooper,
sixth east tennessee; colonel john t. croxton, fourth kentucky;
colonel william w. belknap, fifteenth iowa. these were promptly
appointed brigadier-generals, were already in command of brigades
or divisions; and i doubt if eight promotions were ever made
fairer, or were more honestly earned, during the whole war.
the month of august opened hot and sultry, but our position
before atlanta was healthy, with ample supply of wood, water, and
provisions. the troops had become habituated to the slow and steady
progress of the siege; the skirmish-lines were held close up to the
enemy, were covered by rifle-trenches or logs, and kept up a
continuous clatter of musketry. the mainlines were held farther
back, adapted to the shape of the ground, with muskets loaded and
stacked for instant use. the field-batteries were in select
positions, covered by handsome parapets, and occasional shots from
them gave life and animation to the scene. the men loitered about
the trenches carelessly, or busied themselves in constructing
ingenious huts out of the abundant timber, and seemed as snug,
comfortable, and happy, as though they were at home. general
schofield was still on the extreme left, thomas in the centre, and
howard on the right. two divisions of the fourteenth corps (baird's
and jeff. c. davis's) were detached to the right rear, and held in
reserve.
i thus awaited the effect of the cavalry movement against the
railroad about jonesboro, and had heard from general garrard that
stoneman had gone on to mason; during that day (august st) colonel
brownlow, of a tennessee cavalry regiment, came in to marietta from
general mccook, and reported that mccook's whole division had been
overwhelmed, defeated, and captured at newnan. of course, i was
disturbed by this wild report, though i discredited it, but made
all possible preparations to strengthen our guards along the
railroad to the rear, on the theory that the force of cavalry which
had defeated mccook would at once be on the railroad about
marietta. at the same time garrard was ordered to occupy the
trenches on our left, while schofield's whole army moved to the
extreme right, and extended the line toward east point. thomas was
also ordered still further to thin out his lines, so as to set free
the other division (johnson's) of the fourteenth corps (palmer's),
which was moved to the extreme right rear, and held in reserve
ready to make a bold push from that flank to secure a footing on
the mason railroad at or below east point.
these changes were effected during the d and d days of august,
when general mccook came in and reported the actual results of his
cavalry expedition. he had crossed the chattahoochee river below
campbellton, by his pontoon-bridge; had then marched rapidly across
to the mason railroad at lovejoy's station, where he had reason to
expect general stoneman; but, not hearing of him, he set to work,
tore up two miles of track, burned two trains of cars, and cut away
five miles of telegraph-wire. he also found the wagon-train
belonging to the rebel army in atlanta, burned five hundred wagons,
killed eight hundred mules; and captured seventy-two officers and
three hundred and fifty men. finding his progress eastward, toward
mcdonough, barred by a superior force, he turned back to newnan,
where he found himself completely surrounded by infantry and
cavalry. he had to drop his prisoners and fight his way out, losing
about six hundred men in killed and captured, and then returned
with the remainder to his position at turner's ferry. this was bad
enough, but not so bad as had been reported by colonel brownlow.
meantime, rumors came that general stoneman was down about mason,
on the east bank of the ocmulgee. on the th of august colonel
adams got to marietta with his small brigade of nine hundred men
belonging to stoneman's cavalry, reporting, as usual, all the rest
lost, and this was partially confirmed by a report which came to me
all the way round by general grant's headquarters before richmond.
a few days afterward colonel capron also got in, with another small
brigade perfectly demoralized, and confirmed the report that
general stoneman had covered the escape of these two small
brigades, himself standing with a reserve of seven hundred men,
with which he surrendered to a colonel iverson. thus another of my
cavalry divisions was badly damaged, and out of the fragments we
hastily reorganized three small divisions under brigadier-generals
garrard, mccook, and kilpatrick.
stoneman had not obeyed his orders to attack the railroad first
before going to macon and andersonville, but had crossed the
ocmulgee river high up near covington, and had gone down that river
on the east bank. he reached clinton, and sent out detachments
which struck the railroad leading from macon to savannah at
griswold station, where they found and destroyed seventeen
locomotives and over a hundred cars; then went on and burned the
bridge across the oconee, and reunited the division before macon.
stoneman shelled the town across the river, but could not cross
over by the bridge, and returned to clinton, where he found his
retreat obstructed, as he supposed, by a superior force. there he
became bewildered, and sacrificed himself for the safety of his
command. he occupied the attention of his enemy by a small force of
seven hundred men, giving colonels adams and capron leave, with
their brigades, to cut their way back to me at atlanta. the former
reached us entire, but the latter was struck and scattered at some
place farther north, and came in by detachments. stoneman
surrendered, and remained a prisoner until he was exchanged some
time after, late in september, at rough and ready.
i now became satisfied that cavalry could not, or would not,
make a sufficient lodgment on the railroad below atlanta, and that
nothing would suffice but for us to reach it with the main army.
therefore the most urgent efforts to that end were made, and to
schofield, on the right, was committed the charge of this special
object. he had his own corps (the twenty-third), composed of eleven
thousand and seventy-five infantry and eight hundred and
eighty-five artillery, with mccook's broken division of cavalry,
seventeen hundred and fifty-four men and horses. for this purpose i
also placed the fourteenth corps (palmer) under his orders. this
corps numbered at the time seventeen thousand two hundred and
eighty-eight infantry and eight hundred and twenty-six artillery;
but general palmer claimed to rank general schofield in the date of
his commission as major-general, and denied the latter's right to
exercise command over him. general palmer was a man of ability, but
was not enterprising. his three divisions were compact and strong,
well commanded, admirable on the defensive, but slow to move or to
act on the offensive. his corps (the fourteenth) had sustained, up
to that time, fewer hard knocks than any other corps in the whole
army, and i was anxious to give it a chance. i always expected to
have a desperate fight to get possession of the macon road, which
was then the vital objective of the campaign. its possession by us
would, in my judgment, result in the capture of atlanta, and give
us the fruits of victory, although the destruction of hood's army
was the real object to be desired. yet atlanta was known as the
"gate-city of the south," was full of founderies, arsenals, and
machine-shops, and i knew that its capture would be the death-knell
of the southern confederacy.
on the th of august i ordered general schofield to make a bold
attack on the railroad, anywhere about east point, and ordered
general palmer to report to him for duty. he at once denied general
schofield's right to command him; but, after examining the dates of
their respective commissions, and hearing their arguments, i wrote
to general palmer.
august th.-. p.m.
from the statements made by yourself and general schofield to-day,
my decision is, that he ranks you as a major-general, being of the
same date of present commission, by reason of his previous superior
rank as brigadier-general. the movements of to-morrow are so
important that the orders of the superior on that flank must be
regarded as military orders, and not in the nature of cooperation.
i did hope that there would be no necessity for my making this
decision; but it is better for all parties interested that no
question of rank should occur in actual battle. the sandtown road,
and the railroad, if possible, must be gained to-morrow, if it
costs half your command. i regard the loss of time this afternoon
as equal to the loss of two thousand men.
i also communicated the substance of this to general thomas, to
whose army palmer's corps belonged, who replied on the th:
i regret to hear that palmer has taken the course he has, and i
know that he intends to offer his resignation as soon as he can
properly do so. i recommend that his application be
granted.
and on the th i again wrote to general palmer, arguing the
point with him, advising him, as a friend, not to resign at that
crisis lest his motives might be misconstrued, and because it might
damage his future career in civil life; but, at the same time, i
felt it my duty to say to him that the operations on that flank,
during the th and th, had not been satisfactory—not
imputing to him, however, any want of energy or skill, but
insisting that "the events did not keep pace with my desires."
general schofield had reported to me that night:
i am compelled to acknowledge that i have totally failed to make
any aggressive movement with the fourteenth corps. i have ordered
general johnson's division to replace general hascall's this
evening, and i propose to-morrow to take my own troops
(twenty-third corps) to the right, and try to recover what has been
lost by two days' delay. the force may likely be too small.
i sanctioned the movement, and ordered two of palmers
divisions—davis's and baird's—to follow en echelon in
support of schofield, and summoned general palmer to meet me in
person: he came on the th to my headquarters, and insisted on his
resignation being accepted, for which formal act i referred him to
general thomas. he then rode to general thomas's camp, where he
made a written resignation of his office as commander of the
fourteenth corps, and was granted the usual leave of absence to go
to his home in illinois, there to await further orders. general
thomas recommended that the resignation be accepted; that johnson,
the senior division commander of the corps, should be ordered back
to nashville as chief of cavalry, and that brigadier-general
jefferson c. davis, the next in order, should be promoted major
general, and assigned to command the corps. these changes had to be
referred to the president, in washington, and were, in due time,
approved and executed; and thenceforward i had no reason to
complain of the slowness or inactivity of that splendid corps. it
had been originally formed by general george h. thomas, had been
commanded by him in person, and had imbibed some what his personal
character, viz., steadiness, good order, and deliberation nothing
hasty or rash, but always safe, "slow, and sure." on august th i
telegraphed to general halleck:
have received to-day the dispatches of the secretary of war and of
general grant, which are very satisfactory. we keep hammering away
all the time, and there is no peace, inside or outside of atlanta.
to-day general schofield got round the line which was assaulted
yesterday by general reilly's brigade, turned it and gained the
ground where the assault had been made, and got possession of all
our dead and wounded. he continued to press on that flank, and
brought on a noisy but not a bloody battle. he drove the enemy
behind his main breastworks, which cover the railroad from atlanta
to east point, and captured a good many of the skirmishers, who are
of his best troops—for the militia hug the breastworks close.
i do not deem it prudent to extend any more to the right, but will
push forward daily by parallels, and make the inside of atlanta too
hot to be endured. i have sent back to chattanooga for two
thirty-pound parrotts, with which we can pick out almost any house
in town. i am too impatient for a siege, and don't know but this is
as good a place to fight it out on, as farther inland. one thing is
certain, whether we get inside of atlanta or not, it will be a
used-up community when we are done with it.
in schofield's extension on the th, general reilly's brigade had
struck an outwork, which he promptly attacked, but, as usual, got
entangled in the trees and bushes which had been felled, and lost
about five hundred men, in killed and wounded; but, as above
reported, this outwork was found abandoned the next day, and we
could see from it that the rebels were extending their lines,
parallel with the railroad, about as fast as we could add to our
line of investment. on the th of august the parrott
thirty-pounders were received and placed in position; for a couple
of days we kept up a sharp fire from all our batteries converging
on atlanta, and at every available point we advanced our
infantry-lines, thereby shortening and strengthening the
investment; but i was not willing to order a direct assault, unless
some accident or positive neglect on the part of our antagonist
should reveal an opening. however, it was manifest that no such
opening was intended by hood, who felt secure behind his strong
defenses. he had repelled our cavalry attacks on his railroad, and
had damaged us seriously thereby, so i expected that he would
attempt the same game against our rear. therefore i made
extraordinary exertions to recompose our cavalry divisions, which
were so essential, both for defense and offense. kilpatrick was
given that on our right rear, in support of schofield's exposed
flank; garrard retained that on our general left; and mccook's
division was held somewhat in reserve, about marietta and the
railroad. on the th, having occasion to telegraph to general
grant, then in washington, i used this language:
since july th hood has not attempted to meet us outside his
parapets. in order to possess and destroy effectually his
communications, i may have to leave a corps at the railroad-bridge,
well intrenched, and cut loose with the balance to make a circle of
desolation around atlanta. i do not propose to assault the works,
which are too strong, nor to proceed by regular approaches. i have
lost a good many regiments, and will lose more, by the expiration
of service; and this is the only reason why i want reenforcements.
we have killed, crippled, and captured more of the enemy than we
have lost by his acts.
on the th of august i heard of the success of admiral farragut in
entering mobile bay, which was regarded as a most valuable
auxiliary to our operations at atlanta; and learned that i had been
commissioned a major-general in the regular army, which was
unexpected, and not desired until successful in the capture of
atlanta. these did not change the fact that we were held in check
by the stubborn defense of the place, and a conviction was forced
on my mind that our enemy would hold fast, even though every house
in the town should be battered down by our artillery. it was
evident that we most decoy him out to fight us on something like
equal terms, or else, with the whole army, raise the siege and
attack his communications. accordingly, on the th of august, i
gave general orders for the twentieth corps to draw back to the
railroad-bridge at the chattahoochee, to protect our trains,
hospitals, spare artillery, and the railroad-depot, while the rest
of the army should move bodily to some point on the macon railroad
below east point.
luckily, i learned just then that the enemy's cavalry, under
general wheeler, had made a wide circuit around our left flank, and
had actually reached our railroad at tilton station, above resaca,
captured a drove of one thousand of our beef-cattle, and was strong
enough to appear before dalton, and demand of its commander,
colonel raum, the surrender of the place. general john e. smith,
who was at kingston, collected together a couple of thousand men,
and proceeded in cars to the relief of dalton when wheeler
retreated northward toward cleveland. on the th another
detachment of the enemy's cavalry appeared in force about allatoona
and the etowah bridge, when i became fully convinced that hood had
sent all of his cavalry to raid upon our railroads. for some days
our communication with nashville was interrupted by the destruction
of the telegraph-lines, as well as railroad. i at once ordered
strong reconnoissances forward from our flanks on the left by
garrard, and on the right by kilpatrick. the former moved with so
much caution that i was displeased; but kilpatrick, on the
contrary, displayed so much zeal and activity that i was attracted
to him at once. he reached fairburn station, on the west point
road, and tore it up, returning safely to his position on our right
flank. i summoned him to me, and was so pleased with his spirit and
confidence, that i concluded to suspend the general movement of the
main army, and to send him with his small division of cavalry to
break up the macon road about jonesboro, in the hopes that it would
force hood to evacuate atlanta, and that i should thereby not only
secure possession of the city itself, but probably could catch hood
in the confusion of retreat; and, further to increase the chances
of success.
i ordered general thomas to detach two brigades of garrard's
division of cavalry from the left to the right rear, to act as a
reserve in support of general kilpatrick. meantime, also, the
utmost activity was ordered along our whole front by the infantry
and artillery. kilpatrick got off during the night of the th, and
returned to us on the d, having made the complete circuit of
atlanta. he reported that he had destroyed three miles of the
railroad about jonesboro, which he reckoned would take ten days to
repair; that he had encountered a division of infantry and a
brigade of cavalry (ross's); that he had captured a battery and
destroyed three of its guns, bringing one in as a trophy, and he
also brought in three battle-flags and seventy prisoners. on the
d, however, we saw trains coming into atlanta from the south,
when i became more than ever convinced that cavalry could not or
would not work hard enough to disable a railroad properly, and
therefore resolved at once to proceed to the execution of my
original plan. meantime, the damage done to our own railroad and
telegraph by wheeler, about resaca and dalton, had been repaired,
and wheeler himself was too far away to be of any service to his
own army, and where he could not do us much harm, viz., up about
the hiawaesee. on the th i rode down to the chattahoochee bridge,
to see in person that it could be properly defended by the single
corps proposed to be left there for that purpose, and found that
the rebel works, which had been built by johnston to resist us,
could be easily utilized against themselves; and on returning to my
camp, at that same evening, i telegraphed to general halleck as
follows:
heavy fires in atlanta all day, caused by our artillery. i will be
all ready, and will commence the movement around atlanta by the
south, tomorrow night, and for some time you will hear little of
us. i will keep open a courier line back to the chattahoochee
bridge, by way of sandtown. the twentieth corps will hold the
railroad-bridge, and i will move with the balance of the army,
provisioned for twenty days.
meantime general dodge (commanding the sixteenth corps) had been
wounded in the forehead, had gone to the rear, and his two
divisions were distributed to the fifteenth and seventeenth corps.
the real movement commenced on the th, at night. the twentieth
corps drew back and took post at the railroad-bridge, and the
fourth corps (stanley) moved to his right rear, closing up with the
fourteenth corps (jeff. c. davis) near utoy creek; at the same time
garrard's cavalry, leaving their horses out of sight, occupied the
vacant trenches, so that the enemy did not detect the change at
all. the next night (th) the fifteenth and seventeenth corps,
composing the army of the tennessee (howard), drew out of their
trenches, made a wide circuit, and came up on the extreme right of
the fourth and fourteenth corps of the army of the cumberland
(thomas) along utoy creek, facing south. the enemy seemed to
suspect something that night, using his artillery pretty freely;
but i think he supposed we were going to retreat altogether. an
artillery-shot, fired at random, killed one man and wounded
another, and the next morning some of his infantry came out of
atlanta and found our camps abandoned. it was afterward related
that there was great rejoicing in atlanta "that the yankees were
gone;" the fact was telegraphed all over the south, and several
trains of cars (with ladies) came up from macon to assist in the
celebration of their grand victory.
on the th (making a general left-wheel, pivoting on schofield)
both thomas and howard reached the west point railroad, extending
from east point to red-oak station and fairburn, where we spent the
next day (th) in breaking it up thoroughly. the track was heaved
up in sections the length of a regiment, then separated rail by
rail; bonfires were made of the ties and of fence-rails on which
the rails were heated, carried to trees or telegraph-poles, wrapped
around and left to cool. such rails could not be used again; and,
to be still more certain, we filled up many deep cuts with trees,
brush, and earth, and commingled with them loaded shells, so
arranged that they would explode on an attempt to haul out the
bushes. the explosion of one such shell would have demoralized a
gang of negroes, and thus would have prevented even the attempt to
clear the road.
meantime schofield, with the twenty-third corps, presented a
bold front toward east point, daring and inviting the enemy to
sally out to attack him in position. his first movement was on the
th, to mount gilead church, then to morrow's mills, facing rough
and ready. thomas was on his right, within easy support, moving by
cross-roads from red oak to the fayetteville road, extending from
couch's to renfrew's; and howard was aiming for jonesboro.
i was with general thomas that day, which was hot but otherwise
very pleasant. we stopped for a short noon-rest near a little
church (marked on our maps as shoal-creek church), which stood back
about a hundred yards from the road, in a grove of native oaks. the
infantry column had halted in the road, stacked their arms, and the
men were scattered about—some lying in the shade of the
trees, and others were bringing corn-stalks from a large corn-field
across the road to feed our horses, while still others had arms
full of the roasting-ears, then in their prime. hundreds of fires
were soon started with the fence-rails, and the men were busy
roasting the ears. thomas and i were walking up and down the road
which led to the church, discussing the chances of the movement,
which he thought were extra-hazardous, and our path carried us by a
fire at which a soldier was roasting his corn. the fire was built
artistically; the man was stripping the ears of their husks,
standing them in front of his fire, watching them carefully, and
turning each ear little by little, so as to roast it nicely. he was
down on his knees intent on his business, paying little heed to the
stately and serious deliberations of his leaders. thomas's mind was
running on the fact that we had cut loose from our base of
supplies, and that seventy thousand men were then dependent for
their food on the chance supplies of the country (already
impoverished by the requisitions of the enemy), and on the contents
of our wagons. between thomas and his men there existed a most
kindly relation, and he frequently talked with them in the most
familiar way. pausing awhile, and watching the operations of this
man roasting his corn, he said, "what are you doing?" the man
looked up smilingly "why, general, i am laying in a supply of
provisions." "that is right, my man, but don't waste your
provisions." as we resumed our walk, the man remarked, in a sort of
musing way, but loud enough for me to hear: "there he goes, there
goes the old man, economizing as usual." "economizing" with corn,
which cost only the labor of gathering and roasting!
as we walked, we could hear general howard's guns at intervals,
away off to our right front, but an ominous silence continued
toward our left, where i was expecting at each moment to hear the
sound of battle. that night we reached renfrew's, and had reports
from left to right (from general schofield, about morrow's mills,
to general howard, within a couple of miles of jonesboro). the next
morning (august st) all moved straight for the railroad.
schofield reached it near rough and ready, and thomas at two points
between there and jonesboro. howard found an intrenched foe
(hardee's corps) covering jonesboro, and his men began at once to
dig their accustomed rifle-pits. orders were sent to generals
thomas and schofield to turn straight for jonesboro, tearing up the
railroad-track as they advanced. about . p.m. the enemy sallied
from jonesboro against the fifteenth corps, but was easily
repulsed, and driven back within his lines. all hands were kept
busy tearing up the railroad, and it was not until toward evening
of the st day of september that the fourteenth corps (davis)
closed down on the north front of jonesboro, connecting on his
right with howard, and his left reaching the railroad, along which
general stanley was moving, followed by schofield. general davis
formed his divisions in line about  p.m., swept forward over some
old cotton-fields in full view, and went over the rebel parapet
handsomely, capturing the whole of govan's brigade, with two
field-batteries of ten guns. being on the spot, i checked davis's
movement, and ordered general howard to send the two divisions of
the seventeenth corps (blair) round by his right rear, to get below
jonesboro, and to reach the railroad, so as to cut off retreat in
that direction. i also dispatched orders after orders to hurry
forward stanley, so as to lap around jonesboro on the east, hoping
thus to capture the whole of hardee's corps. i sent first captain
audenried (aide-de-camp), then colonel poe, of the engineers, and
lastly general thomas himself (and that is the only time during the
campaign i can recall seeing general thomas urge his horse into a
gallop). night was approaching, and the country on the farther side
of the railroad was densely wooded. general stanley had come up on
the left of davis, and was deploying, though there could not have
been on his front more than a skirmish-line. had he moved straight
on by the flank, or by a slight circuit to his left, he would have
inclosed the whole ground occupied by hardee's corps, and that
corps could not have escaped us; but night came on, and hardee did
escape.
meantime general slocum had reached his corps (the twentieth),
stationed at the chattahoochee bridge, had relieved general a. s.
williams in command, and orders had been sent back to him to feel
forward occasionally toward atlanta, to observe the effect when we
had reached the railroad. that night i was so restless and
impatient that i could not sleep, and about midnight there arose
toward atlanta sounds of shells exploding, and other sound like
that of musketry. i walked to the house of a farmer close by my
bivouac, called him out to listen to the reverberations which came
from the direction of atlanta (twenty miles to the north of us),
and inquired of him if he had resided there long. he said he had,
and that these sounds were just like those of a battle. an interval
of quiet then ensued, when again, about  a.m., arose other similar
explosions, but i still remained in doubt whether the enemy was
engaged in blowing up his own magazines, or whether general slocum
had not felt forward, and become engaged in a real battle.
the next morning general hardee was gone, and we all pushed
forward along the railroad south, in close pursuit, till we ran up
against his lines at a point just above lovejoy's station. while
bringing forward troops and feeling the new position of our
adversary, rumors came from the rear that the enemy had evacuated
atlanta, and that general slocum was in the city. later in the day
i received a note in slocum's own handwriting, stating that he had
heard during the night the very sounds that i have referred to;
that he had moved rapidly up from the bridge about daylight, and
had entered atlanta unopposed. his letter was dated inside the
city, so there was no doubt of the fact. general thomas's bivouac
was but a short distance from mine, and, before giving notice to
the army in general orders, i sent one of my staff-officers to show
him the note. in a few minutes the officer returned, soon followed
by thomas himself, who again examined the note, so as to be
perfectly certain that it was genuine. the news seemed to him too
good to be true. he snapped his fingers, whistled, and almost
danced, and, as the news spread to the army, the shouts that arose
from our men, the wild hallooing and glorious laughter, were to us
a full recompense for the labor and toils and hardships through
which we had passed in the previous three months.
a courier-line was at once organized, messages were sent back
and forth from our camp at lovejoy's to atlanta, and to our
telegraph-station at the chattahoochee bridge. of course, the glad
tidings flew on the wings of electricity to all parts of the north,
where the people had patiently awaited news of their husbands,
sons, and brothers, away down in "dixie land;" and congratulations
came pouring back full of good-will and patriotism. this victory
was most opportune; mr. lincoln himself told me afterward that even
he had previously felt in doubt, for the summer was fast passing
away; that general grant seemed to be checkmated about richmond and
petersburg, and my army seemed to have run up against an impassable
barrier, when, suddenly and unexpectedly, came the news that
"atlanta was ours, and fairly won." on this text many a fine speech
was made, but none more eloquent than that by edward everett, in
boston. a presidential election then agitated the north. mr.
lincoln represented the national cause, and general mcclellan had
accepted the nomination of the democratic party, whose platform was
that the war was a failure, and that it was better to allow the
south to go free to establish a separate government, whose
corner-stone should be slavery. success to our arms at that instant
was therefore a political necessity; and it was all-important that
something startling in our interest should occur before the
election in november. the brilliant success at atlanta filled that
requirement, and made the election of mr. lincoln certain. among
the many letters of congratulation received, those of mr. lincoln
and general grant seem most important:
washington, d.c. september , .
the national thanks are rendered by the president to major-general
w. t. sherman and the gallant officers and soldiers of his command
before atlanta, for the distinguished ability and perseverance
displayed in the campaign in georgia, which, under divine favor,
has resulted in the capture of atlanta. the marches, battles,
sieges, and other military operations, that have signalized the
campaign, must render it famous in the annals of war, and have
entitled those who have participated therein to the applause and
thanks of the nation.
president of the united states
city point virginia, september , - p.m.
major-general sherman: i have just received your dispatch
announcing the capture of atlanta. in honor of your great victory,
i have ordered a salute to be fired with shotted guns from every
battery bearing upon the enemy. the salute will be fired within an
hour, amid great rejoicing.
u. s. grant, lieutenant-general.
these dispatches were communicated to the army in general
orders, and we all felt duly encouraged and elated by the praise of
those competent to bestow it.
the army still remained where the news of success had first
found us, viz., lovejoy's; but, after due refection, i resolved not
to attempt at that time a further pursuit of hood's army, but
slowly and deliberately to move back, occupy atlanta, enjoy a short
period of rest, and to think well over the next step required in
the progress of events. orders for this movement were made on the
th september, and three days were given for each army to reach the
place assigned it, viz.: the army of the cumberland in and about
atlanta; the army of the tennessee at east point; and the army of
the ohio at decatur.
personally i rode back to jonesboro on the th, and there
inspected the rebel hospital, full of wounded officers and men left
by hardee in his retreat. the next night we stopped at rough and
ready, and on the th of september we rode into atlanta, then
occupied by the twentieth corps (general slocum). in the
court-house square was encamped a brigade, embracing the
massachusetts second and thirty-third regiments, which had two of
the finest bands of the army, and their music was to us all a
source of infinite pleasure during our sojourn in that city. i took
up my headquarters in the house of judge lyons, which stood
opposite one corner of the court-house square, and at once set
about a measure already ordered, of which i had thought much and
long, viz., to remove the entire civil population, and to deny to
all civilians from the rear the expected profits of civil trade.
hundreds of sutlers and traders were waiting at nashville and
chattanooga, greedy to reach atlanta with their wares and goods,
with, which to drive a profitable trade with the inhabitants. i
gave positive orders that none of these traders, except three (one
for each separate army), should be permitted to come nearer than
chattanooga; and, moreover, i peremptorily required that all the
citizens and families resident in atlanta should go away, giving to
each the option to go south or north, as their interests or
feelings dictated. i was resolved to make atlanta a pure military
garrison or depot, with no civil population to influence military
measures. i had seen memphis, vicksburg, natchez, and new orleans,
all captured from the enemy, and each at once was garrisoned by a
full division of troops, if not more; so that success was actually
crippling our armies in the field by detachments to guard and
protect the interests of a hostile population.
i gave notice of this purpose, as early as the th of september,
to general halleck, in a letter concluding with these words:
if the people raise a howl against my barbarity and cruelty, i
will answer that war is war, and not popularity-seeking. if they
want peace, they and their relatives most stop the war.
i knew, of course, that such a measure would be strongly
criticised, but made up my mind to do it with the absolute
certainty of its justness, and that time would sanction its wisdom.
i knew that the people of the south would read in this measure two
important conclusions: one, that we were in earnest; and the other,
if they were sincere in their common and popular clamor "to die in
the last ditch," that the opportunity would soon come.
soon after our reaching atlanta, general hood had sent in by a
flag of truce a proposition, offering a general exchange of
prisoners, saying that he was authorized to make such an exchange
by the richmond authorities, out of the vast number of our men then
held captive at andersonville, the same whom general stoneman had
hoped to rescue at the time of his raid. some of these prisoners
had already escaped and got in, had described the pitiable
condition of the remainder, and, although i felt a sympathy for
their hardships and sufferings as deeply as any man could, yet as
nearly all the prisoners who had been captured by us during the
campaign had been sent, as fast as taken, to the usual depots
north, they were then beyond my control. there were still about two
thousand, mostly captured at jonesboro, who had been sent back by
cars, but had not passed chattanooga. these i ordered back, and
offered general hood to exchange them for stoneman, buell, and such
of my own army as would make up the equivalent; but i would not
exchange for his prisoners generally, because i knew these would
have to be sent to their own regiments, away from my army, whereas
all we could give him could at once be put to duty in his immediate
army. quite an angry correspondence grew up between us, which was
published at the time in the newspapers, but it is not to be found
in any book of which i have present knowledge, and therefore is
given here, as illustrative of the events referred to, and of the
feelings of the actors in the game of war at that particular
crisis, together with certain other original letters of generals
grant and halleck, never hitherto published.
september , 
major-general w. t. sherman, commanding military division of the
mississippi
general: i send lieutenant-colonel horace porter, of my staff, with
this. colonel porter will explain to you the exact condition of
affairs here, better than i can do in the limits of a letter.
although i feel myself strong enough now for offensive operations,
i am holding on quietly, to get advantage of recruits and
convalescents, who are coming forward very rapidly. my lines are
necessarily very long, extending from deep bottom, north of the
james, across the peninsula formed by the appomattox and the james,
and south of the appomattox to the weldon road. this line is very
strongly fortified, and can be held with comparatively few men;
but, from its great length, necessarily takes many in the
aggregate. i propose, when i do move, to extend my left so as to
control what is known as the southside, or lynchburg &
petersburg road; then, if possible, to keep the danville road out.
at the same time this move is made, i want to send a force of from
six to ten thousand men against wilmington. the way i propose to do
this is to land the men north of fort fisher, and hold that point.
at the same time a large naval fleet will be assembled there, and
the iron-clads will run the batteries as they did at mobile. this
will give us the same control of the harbor of wilmington that we
now have of the harbor of mobile. what you are to do with the
forces at your command, i do not exactly see. the difficulties of
supplying your army, except when they are constantly moving beyond
where you are, i plainly see. if it had not been for price's
movement, canby could have sent twelve thousand more men to mobile.
from your command on the mississippi, an equal number could have
been taken. with these forces, my idea would have been to divide
them, sending one-half to mobile, and the other half to savannah.
you could then move as proposed in your telegram, so as to threaten
macon and augusta equally. whichever one should be abandoned by the
enemy, you could take and open up a new base of supplies. my object
now in sending a staff-officer to you is not so much to suggest
operations for you as to get your views, and to have plans matured
by the time every thing can be got ready. it would probably be the
th of october before any of the plans here indicated will be
executed. if you have any promotions to recommend, send the names
forward, and i will approve them.
in conclusion, it is hardly necessary for me to say that i feel you
have accomplished the most gigantic undertaking given to any
general in this war, and with a skill and ability that will be
acknowledged in history as unsurpassed, if not unequaled. it gives
me as much pleasure to record this in your favor as it world in
favor of any living man, myself included. truly yours,
u. s. grant, lieutenant-general.
atlanta, georgia, september , .
lieutenant-general u. s. grant, commander-in-chief, city point,
virgina.
general: i have the honor to acknowledge, at the hands of
lieutenant colonel porter, of your staff, your letter of september
th, and accept with thanks the honorable and kindly mention of
the services of this army in the great cause in which we are all
engaged.
i send by colonel porter all official reports which are completed,
and will in a few days submit a list of names which are deemed
worthy of promotion.
i think we owe it to the president to save him the invidious task
of selection among the vast number of worthy applicants, and have
ordered my army commanders to prepare their lists with great care,
and to express their preferences, based upon claims of actual
capacity and services rendered.
these i will consolidate, and submit in such a form that, if
mistakes are made, they will at least be sanctioned by the best
contemporaneous evidence of merit, for i know that vacancies do not
exist equal in number to that of the officers who really deserve
promotion.
as to the future, i am pleased to know that your army is being
steadily reinforced by a good class of men, and i hope it will go
on until you have a force that is numerically double that of your
antagonist, so that with one part you can watch him, and with the
other push out boldly from your left flank, occupy the southside
railroad, compel him to attack you in position, or accept battle on
your own terms.
we ought to ask our country for the largest possible armies that
can be raised, as so important a thing as the self-existence of a
great nation should not be left to the fickle chances of war.
now that mobile is shut out to the commerce of our enemy, it calls
for no further effort on our part, unless the capture of the city
can be followed by the occupation of the alabama river and the
railroad to columbus, georgia, when that place would be a
magnificent auxiliary to my further progress into georgia; but,
until general canby is much reinforced, and until he can more
thoroughly subdue the scattered armies west of the mississippi, i
suppose that much cannot be attempted by him against the alabama
river and columbus, georgia.
the utter destruction of wilmington, north carolina, is of
importance only in connection with the necessity of cutting off all
foreign trade to our enemy, and if admiral farragut can get across
the bar, and move quickly, i suppose he will succeed. from my
knowledge of the mouth of cape fear river, i anticipate more
difficulty in getting the heavy ships across the bar than in
reaching the town of wilmington; but, of course, the soundings of
the channel are well known at washington, as well as the draught of
his iron-clads, so that it must be demonstrated to be feasible, or
else it would not be attempted. if successful, i suppose that fort
caswell will be occupied, and the fleet at once sent to the
savannah river. then the reduction of that city is the next
question. it once in our possession, and the river open to us, i
would not hesitate to cross the state of georgia with sixty
thousand men, hauling some stores, and depending on the country for
the balance. where a million of people find subsistence, my army
won't starve; but, as you know, in a country like georgia, with few
roads and innumerable streams, an inferior force can so delay an
army and harass it, that it would not be a formidable object; but
if the enemy knew that we had our boats in the savannah river i
could rapidly move to milledgeville, where there is abundance of
corn and meat, and could so threaten macon and augusta that the
enemy world doubtless give up macon for augusta; then i would move
so as to interpose between augusta and savannah, and force him to
give us augusta, with the only powder-mills and factories remaining
in the south, or let us have the use of the savannah river. either
horn of the dilemma will be worth a battle. i would prefer his
holding augusta (as the probabilities are); for then, with the
savannah river in our possession, the taking of augusta would be a
mere matter of time. this campaign can be made in the winter.
but the more i study the game, the more am i convinced that it
would be wrong for us to penetrate farther into georgia without an
objective beyond. it would not be productive of much good. i can
start east and make a circuit south and back, doing vast damage to
the state, but resulting in no permanent good; and by mere
threatening to do so, i hold a rod over the georgians, who are not
over-loyal to the south. i will therefore give it as my opinion
that your army and canby's should be reinforced to the maximum;
that, after you get wilmington, you should strike for savannah and
its river; that general canby should hold the mississippi river,
and send a force to take columbus, georgia, either by way of the
alabama or appalachicola river; that i should keep hood employed
and put my army in fine order for a march on augusta, columbia, and
charleston; and start as soon as wilmington is sealed to commerce,
and the city of savannah is in our possession.
i think it will be found that the movements of price and shelby,
west of the mississippi, are mere diversions. they cannot hope to
enter missouri except as raiders; and the truth is, that general
rosecrans should be ashamed to take my troops for such a purpose.
if you will secure wilmington and the city of savannah from your
centre, and let general canby leave command over the mississippi
river and country west of it, i will send a force to the alabama
and appalachicola, provided you give me one hundred thousand of the
drafted men to fill up my old regiments; and if you will fix a day
to be in savannah, i will insure our possession of macon and a
point on the river below augusta. the possession of the savannah
river is more than fatal to the possibility of southern
independence. they may stand the fall of richmond, but not of all
georgia.
i will have a long talk with colonel porter, and tell him every
thing that may occur to me of interest to you.
in the mean time, know that i admire your dogged perseverance and
pluck more than ever. if you can whip lee and i can march to the
atlantic, i think uncle abe will give us a twenty days' leave of
absence to see the young folks.
yours as ever,
w. t. sherman, major-general.
washington, september , .
general w. t. sherman, atlanta, georgia.
my dear general: your very interesting letter of the th is just
received. its perusal has given me the greatest pleasure. i have
not written before to congratulate you on the capture of atlanta,
the objective point of your brilliant campaign, for the reason that
i have been suffering from my annual attack of "coryza," or
hay-cold. it affects my eyes so much that i can scarcely see to
write. as you suppose, i have watched your movements most
attentively and critically, and i do not hesitate to say that your
campaign has been the most brilliant of the war. its results are
less striking and less complete than those of general grant at
vicksburg, but then you have had greater difficulties to encounter,
a longer line of communications to keep up, and a longer and more
continuous strain upon yourself and upon your army.
you must have been very considerably annoyed by the state negro
recruiting-agents. your letter was a capital one, and did much
good. the law was a ridiculous one; it was opposed by the war
department, but passed through the influence of eastern
manufacturers, who hoped to escape the draft in that way. they were
making immense fortunes out of the war, and could well afford to
purchase negro recruits, and thus save their employees at
home.
i fully agree with you in regard to the policy of a stringent
draft; but, unfortunately, political influences are against us, and
i fear it will not amount to much. mr. seward's speech at auburn,
again prophesying, for the twentieth time, that the rebellion would
be crushed in a few months, and saying that there would be no
draft, as we now had enough soldiers to end the war, etc., has done
much harm, in a military point of view. i have seen enough of
politics here to last me for life. you are right in avoiding them.
mcclellan may possibly reach the white house, but he will lose the
respect of all honest, high-minded patriots, by his affiliation
with such traitors and copperheads as b—-, v—-,
w—-, s—-, & co. he would not stand upon the
traitorous chicago platform, but he had not the manliness to oppose
it. a major-general in the united states army, and yet not one word
to utter against rebels or the rebellion! i had much respect for
mcclellan before he became a politician, but very little after
reading his letter accepting the nomination.
hooker certainly made a mistake in leaving before the capture of
atlanta. i understand that, when here, he said that you would fail;
your army was discouraged and dissatisfied, etc., etc. he is most
unmeasured in his abuse of me. i inclose you a specimen of what he
publishes in northern papers, wherever he goes. they are dictated
by himself and written by w. b. and such worthies. the funny part
of the business is, that i had nothing whatever to do with his
being relieved on either occasion. moreover, i have never said any
thing to the president or secretary of war to injure him in the
slightest degree, and he knows that perfectly well. his animosity
arises from another source. he is aware that i know some things
about his character and conduct in california, and, fearing that i
may use that information against him, he seeks to ward off its
effect by making it appear that i am his personal enemy, am jealous
of him, etc. i know of no other reason for his hostility to me. he
is welcome to abuse me as much as he pleases; i don't think it will
do him much good, or me much harm. i know very little of general
howard, but believe him to be a true, honorable man. thomas is also
a noble old war-horse. it is true, as you say, that he is slow, but
he is always sure.
i have not seen general grant since the fall of atlanta, and do not
know what instructions he has sent you. i fear that canby has not
the means to do much by way of mobile. the military effects of
banks's disaster are now showing themselves by the threatened
operations of price & co. toward missouri, thus keeping in
check our armies west of the mississippi.
with many thanks for your kind letter, and wishes for your future
success, yours truly,
september , .
major general halleck, chief of staff, washington d.c.
general: i have the honor herewith to submit copies of a
correspondence between general hood, of the confederate army, the
mayor of atlanta, and myself, touching the removal of the
inhabitants of atlanta.
in explanation of the tone which marks some of these letters, i
will only call your attention to the fact that, after i had
announced my determination, general hood took upon himself to
question my motives. i could not tamely submit to such
impertinence; and i have also seen that, in violation of all
official usage, he has published in the macon newspapers such parts
of the correspondence as suited his purpose. this could have had no
other object than to create a feeling on the part of the people;
but if he expects to resort to such artifices, i think i can meet
him there too.
it is sufficient for my government to know that the removal of the
inhabitants has been made with liberality and fairness, that it has
been attended with no force, and that no women or children have
suffered, unless for want of provisions by their natural protectors
and friends.
my real reasons for this step were:
we want all the houses of atlanta for military storage and
occupation.
we want to contract the lines of defense, so as to diminish the
garrison to the limit necessary to defend its narrow and vital
parts, instead of embracing, as the lines now do, the vast suburbs.
this contraction of the lines, with the necessary citadels and
redoubts, will make it necessary to destroy the very houses used by
families as residences.
atlanta is a fortified town, was stubbornly defended, and fairly
captured. as captors, we have a right to it.
the residence here of a poor population would compel us, sooner or
later, to feed them or to see them starve under our eyes.
the residence here of the families of our enemies would be a
temptation and a means to keep up a correspondence dangerous and
hurtful to our cause; a civil population calls for provost-guards,
and absorbs the attention of officers in listening to everlasting
complaints and special grievances that are not military.
these are my reasons; and, if satisfactory to the government of the
united states, it makes no difference whether it pleases general
hood and his people or not. i am, with respect, your obedient
servant,
w. t. sherman, major-general commanding.
in the field, atlanta, georgia, september , .
general hood, commanding confederate army.
general: i have deemed it to the interest of the united states that
the citizens now residing in atlanta should remove, those who
prefer it to go south, and the rest north. for the latter i can
provide food and transportation to points of their election in
tennessee, kentucky, or farther north. for the former i can provide
transportation by cars as far as rough and ready, and also wagons;
but, that their removal may be made with as little discomfort as
possible, it will be necessary for you to help the families from
rough and ready to the care at lovejoy's. if you consent, i will
undertake to remove all the families in atlanta who prefer to go
south to rough and ready, with all their movable effects, viz.,
clothing, trunks, reasonable furniture, bedding, etc., with their
servants, white and black, with the proviso that no force shall be
used toward the blacks, one way or the other. if they want to go
with their masters or mistresses, they may do so; otherwise they
will be sent away, unless they be men, when they may be employed by
our quartermaster. atlanta is no place for families or
non-combatants, and i have no desire to send them north if you will
assist in conveying them south. if this proposition meets your
views, i will consent to a truce in the neighborhood of rough and
ready, stipulating that any wagons, horses, animals, or persons
sent there for the purposes herein stated, shall in no manner be
harmed or molested; you in your turn agreeing that any care,
wagons, or carriages, persons or animals sent to the same point,
shall not be interfered with. each of us might send a guard of,
say, one hundred men, to maintain order, and limit the truce to,
say, two days after a certain time appointed.
i have authorized the mayor to choose two citizens to convey to you
this letter, with such documents as the mayor may forward in
explanation, and shall await your reply. i have the honor to be
your obedient servant.
w. t. sherman, major-general commanding.
major general w. t. sherman, commanding united states forces in
georgia
general: your letter of yesterday's date, borne by james m. ball
and james r. crew, citizens of atlanta, is received. you say
therein, "i deem it to be to the interest of the united states that
the citizens now residing in atlanta should remove," etc. i do not
consider that i have any alternative in this matter. i therefore
accept your proposition to declare a truce of two days, or such
time as may be necessary to accomplish the purpose mentioned, and
shall render all assistance in my power to expedite the
transportation of citizens in this direction. i suggest that a
staff-officer be appointed by you to superintend the removal from
the city to rough and ready, while i appoint a like officer to
control their removal farther south; that a guard of one hundred
men be sent by either party as you propose, to maintain order at
that place, and that the removal begin on monday next.
and now, sir, permit me to say that the unprecedented measure you
propose transcends, in studied and ingenious cruelty, all acts ever
before brought to my attention in the dark history of war.
in the name of god and humanity, i protest, believing that you will
find that you are expelling from their homes and firesides the
wives and children of a brave people. i am, general, very
respectfully, your obedient servant,
j. b. hood, general.
atlanta, georgia, september , .
general j. b. hood, commanding army of tennessee, confederate
army.
general: i have the honor to acknowledge the receipt of your letter
of this date, at the hands of messrs. ball and crew, consenting to
the arrangements i had proposed to facilitate the removal south of
the people of atlanta, who prefer to go in that direction. i
inclose you a copy of my orders, which will, i am satisfied,
accomplish my purpose perfectly.
you style the measures proposed "unprecedented," and appeal to the
dark history of war for a parallel, as an act of "studied and
ingenious cruelty." it is not unprecedented; for general johnston
himself very wisely and properly removed the families all the way
from dalton down, and i see no reason why atlanta should be
excepted. nor is it necessary to appeal to the dark history of war,
when recent and modern examples are so handy. you yourself burned
dwelling-houses along your parapet, and i have seen to-day fifty
houses that you have rendered uninhabitable because they stood in
the way of your forts and men. you defended atlanta on a line so
close to town that every cannon-shot and many musket-shots from our
line of investment, that overshot their mark, went into the
habitations of women and children. general hardee did the same at
jonesboro, and general johnston did the same, last summer, at
jackson, mississippi. i have not accused you of heartless cruelty,
but merely instance these cases of very recent occurrence, and
could go on and enumerate hundreds of others, and challenge any
fair man to judge which of us has the heart of pity for the
families of a "brave people."
i say that it is kindness to these families of atlanta to remove
them now, at once, from scenes that women and children should not
be exposed to, and the "brave people" should scorn to commit their
wives and children to the rude barbarians who thus, as you say,
violate the laws of war, as illustrated in the pages of its dark
history.
in the name of common-sense, i ask you not to appeal to a just god
in such a sacrilegious manner. you who, in the midst of peace and
prosperity, have plunged a nation into war—dark and cruel
war—who dared and badgered us to battle, insulted our flag,
seized our arsenals and forts that were left in the honorable
custody of peaceful ordnance-sergeants, seized and made "prisoners
of war" the very garrisons sent to protect your people against
negroes and indians, long before any overt act was committed by the
(to you) hated lincoln government; tried to force kentucky and
missouri into rebellion, spite of themselves; falsified the vote of
louisiana; turned loose your privateers to plunder unarmed ships;
expelled union families by the thousands, burned their houses, and
declared, by an act of your congress, the confiscation of all debts
due northern men for goods had and received! talk thus to the
marines, but not to me, who have seen these things, and who will
this day make as much sacrifice for the peace and honor of the
south as the best-born southerner among you! if we must be enemies,
let us be men, and fight it out as we propose to do, and not deal
in arch hypocritical appeals to god and humanity. god will judge us
in due time, and he will pronounce whether it be more humane to
fight with a town full of women and the families of a brave people
at our back or to remove them in time to places of safety among
their own friends and people. i am, very respectfully, your
obedient servant,
w. t. sherman, major-general commanding.
headquarters army of the tennessee september , 
major-general w. t, sherman, commanding military division of the
mississippi.
general: i have the honor to acknowledge the receipt of your letter
of the th inst., with its inclosure in reference to the women,
children, and others, whom you have thought proper to expel from
their homes in the city of atlanta. had you seen proper to let the
matter rest there, i would gladly have allowed your letter to close
this correspondence, and, without your expressing it in words,
would have been willing to believe that, while "the interests of
the united states," in your opinion, compelled you to an act of
barbarous cruelty, you regretted the necessity, and we would have
dropped the subject; but you have chosen to indulge in statements
which i feel compelled to notice, at least so far as to signify my
dissent, and not allow silence in regard to them to be construed as
acquiescence.
i see nothing in your communication which induces me to modify the
language of condemnation with which i characterized your order. it
but strengthens me in the opinion that it stands "preeminent in the
dark history of war for studied and ingenious cruelty." your
original order was stripped of all pretenses; you announced the
edict for the sole reason that it was "to the interest of the
united states." this alone you offered to us and the civilized
world as an all-sufficient reason for disregarding the laws of god
and man. you say that "general johnston himself very wisely and
properly removed the families all the way from dalton down." it is
due to that gallant soldier and gentleman to say that no act of his
distinguished career gives the least color to your unfounded
aspersions upon his conduct. he depopulated no villages, nor towns,
nor cities, either friendly or hostile. he offered and extended
friendly aid to his unfortunate fellow-citizens who desired to flee
from your fraternal embraces. you are equally unfortunate in your
attempt to find a justification for this act of cruelty, either in
the defense of jonesboro, by general hardee, or of atlanta, by
myself. general hardee defended his position in front of jonesboro
at the expense of injury to the houses; an ordinary, proper, and
justifiable act of war. i defended atlanta at the same risk and
cost. if there was any fault in either case, it was your own, in
not giving notice, especially in the case of atlanta, of your
purpose to shell the town, which is usual in war among civilized
nations. no inhabitant was expelled from his home and fireside by
the orders of general hardee or myself, and therefore your recent
order can find no support from the conduct of either of us. i feel
no other emotion other than pain in reading that portion of your
letter which attempts to justify your shelling atlanta without
notice under pretense that i defended atlanta upon a line so close
to town that every cannon-shot and many musket-balls from your line
of investment, that overshot their mark, went into the habitations
of women and children. i made no complaint of your firing into
atlanta in any way you thought proper. i make none now, but there
are a hundred thousand witnesses that you fired into the
habitations of women and children for weeks, firing far above and
miles beyond my line of defense. i have too good an opinion,
founded both upon observation and experience, of the skill of your
artillerists, to credit the insinuation that they for several weeks
unintentionally fired too high for my modest field-works, and
slaughtered women and children by accident and want of skill.
the residue of your letter is rather discussion. it opens a wide
field for the discussion of questions which i do not feel are
committed to me. i am only a general of one of the armies of the
confederate states, charged with military operations in the field,
under the direction of my superior officers, and i am not called
upon to discuss with you the causes of the present war, or the
political questions which led to or resulted from it. these grave
and important questions have been committed to far abler hands than
mine, and i shall only refer to them so far as to repel any unjust
conclusion which might be drawn from my silence. you charge my
country with "daring and badgering you to battle." the truth is, we
sent commissioners to you, respectfully offering a peaceful
separation, before the first gun was fired on either aide. you say
we insulted your flag. the truth is, we fired upon it, and those
who fought under it, when you came to our doors upon the mission of
subjugation. you say we seized upon your forts and arsenals, and
made prisoners of the garrisons sent to protect us against negroes
and indians. the truth is, we, by force of arms, drove out insolent
intruders and took possession of our own forts and arsenals, to
resist your claims to dominion over masters, slaves, and indians,
all of whom are to this day, with a unanimity unexampled in the
history of the world, warring against your attempts to become their
masters. you say that we tried to force missouri and kentucky into
rebellion in spite of themselves. the truth is, my government, from
the beginning of this struggle to this hour, has again and again
offered, before the whole world, to leave it to the unbiased will
of these states, and all others, to determine for themselves
whether they will cast their destiny with your government or ours;
and your government has resisted this fundamental principle of free
institutions with the bayonet, and labors daily, by force and
fraud, to fasten its hateful tyranny upon the unfortunate freemen
of these states. you say we falsified the vote of louisiana. the
truth is, louisiana not only separated herself from your government
by nearly a unanimous vote of her people, but has vindicated the
act upon every battle-field from gettysburg to the sabine, and has
exhibited an heroic devotion to her decision which challenges the
admiration and respect of every man capable of feeling sympathy for
the oppressed or admiration for heroic valor. you say that we
turned loose pirates to plunder your unarmed ships. the truth is,
when you robbed us of our part of the navy, we built and bought a
few vessels, hoisted the flag of our country, and swept the seas,
in defiance of your navy, around the whole circumference of the
globe. you say we have expelled union families by thousands. the
truth is, not a single family has been expelled from the
confederate states, that i am aware of; but, on the contrary, the
moderation of our government toward traitors has been a fruitful
theme of denunciation by its enemies and well-meaning friends of
our cause. you say my government, by acts of congress, has
confiscated "all debts due northern men for goods sold and
delivered." the truth is, our congress gave due and ample time to
your merchants and traders to depart from our shores with their
ships, goods, and effects, and only sequestrated the property of
our enemies in retaliation for their acts—declaring us
traitors, and confiscating our property wherever their power
extended, either in their country or our own. such are your
accusations, and such are the facts known of all men to be
true.
you order into exile the whole population of a city; drive men,
women and children from their homes at the point of the bayonet,
under the plea that it is to the interest of your government, and
on the claim that it is "an act of kindness to these families of
atlanta." butler only banished from new orleans the registered
enemies of his government, and acknowledged that he did it as a
punishment. you issue a sweeping edict, covering all the
inhabitants of a city, and add insult to the injury heaped upon the
defenseless by assuming that you have done them a kindness. this
you follow by the assertion that you will "make as much sacrifice
for the peace and honor of the south as the best-born southerner."
and, because i characterize what you call as kindness as being real
cruelty, you presume to sit in judgment between me and my god; and
you decide that my earnest prayer to the almighty father to save
our women and children from what you call kindness, is a
"sacrilegious, hypocritical appeal."
you came into our country with your army, avowedly for the purpose
of subjugating free white men, women, and children, and not only
intend to rule over them, but you make negroes your allies, and
desire to place over us an inferior race, which we have raised from
barbarism to its present position, which is the highest ever
attained by that race, in any country, in all time. i must,
therefore, decline to accept your statements in reference to your
kindness toward the people of atlanta, and your willingness to
sacrifice every thing for the peace and honor of the south, and
refuse to be governed by your decision in regard to matters between
myself, my country, and my god.
you say, "let us fight it out like men." to this my reply
is—for myself, and i believe for all the free men, ay, and
women and children, in my country—we will fight you to the
death! better die a thousand deaths than submit to live under you
or your government and your negro allies!
having answered the points forced upon me by your letter of the th
of september, i close this correspondence with you; and,
notwithstanding your comments upon my appeal to god in the cause of
humanity, i again humbly and reverently invoke his almighty aid in
defense of justice and right. respectfully, your obedient
servant,
j. b. hood, general.
atlanta, georgia, september , 
major-general w. t. sherman.
sir: we the undersigned, mayor and two of the council for the city
of atlanta, for the time being the only legal organ of the people
of the said city, to express their wants and wishes, ask leave most
earnestly but respectfully to petition you to reconsider the order
requiring them to leave atlanta.
at first view, it struck us that the measure world involve
extraordinary hardship and loss, but since we have seen the
practical execution of it so far as it has progressed, and the
individual condition of the people, and heard their statements as
to the inconveniences, loss, and suffering attending it, we are
satisfied that the amount of it will involve in the aggregate
consequences appalling and heart-rending.
many poor women are in advanced state of pregnancy, others now
having young children, and whose husbands for the greater part are
either in the army, prisoners, or dead. some say: "i have such a
one sick at my house; who will wait on them when i am gone?" others
say: "what are we to do? we have no house to go to, and no means to
buy, build, or rent any; no parents, relatives, or friends, to go
to." another says: "i will try and take this or that article of
property, but such and such things i must leave behind, though i
need them much." we reply to them: "general sherman will carry your
property to rough and ready, and general hood will take it thence
on." and they will reply to that: "but i want to leave the railroad
at such a place, and cannot get conveyance from there on."
we only refer to a few facts, to try to illustrate in part how this
measure will operate in practice. as you advanced, the people north
of this fell back; and before your arrival here, a large portion of
the people had retired south, so that the country south of this is
already crowded, and without houses enough to accommodate the
people, and we are informed that many are now staying in churches
and other out-buildings.
this being so, how is it possible for the people still here (mostly
women and children) to find any shelter? and how can they live
through the winter in the woods—no shelter or subsistence, in
the midst of strangers who know them not, and without the power to
assist them much, if they were willing to do so?
this is but a feeble picture of the consequences of this measure.
you know the woe, the horrors, and the suffering, cannot be
described by words; imagination can only conceive of it, and we ask
you to take these things into consideration.
we know your mind and time are constantly occupied with the duties
of your command, which almost deters us from asking your attention
to this matter, but thought it might be that you had not considered
this subject in all of its awful consequences, and that on more
reflection you, we hope, would not make this people an exception to
all mankind, for we know of no such instance ever having
occurred—surely never in the united states—and what has
this helpless people done, that they should be driven from their
homes, to wander strangers and outcasts, and exiles, and to subsist
on charity?
we do not know as yet the number of people still here; of those who
are here, we are satisfied a respectable number, if allowed to
remain at home, could subsist for several months without
assistance, and a respectable number for a much longer time, and
who might not need assistance at any time.
in conclusion, we most earnestly and solemnly petition you to
reconsider this order, or modify it, and suffer this unfortunate
people to remain at home, and enjoy what little means they
have.
respectfully submitted
james m. calhoun, mayor.
e. e. rawson, councilman.
s. c. warns, councilman.
atlanta, georgia, september , .
james m. calhoun, mayor, e. e. rawson and s. c. wares, representing
city council of atlanta.
gentlemen: i have your letter of the th, in the nature of a
petition to revoke my orders removing all the inhabitants from
atlanta. i have read it carefully, and give full credit to your
statements of the distress that will be occasioned, and yet shall
not revoke my orders, because they were not designed to meet the
humanities of the case, but to prepare for the future struggles in
which millions of good people outside of atlanta have a deep
interest. we must have peace, not only at atlanta, but in all
america. to secure this, we must stop the war that now desolates
our once happy and favored country. to stop war, we must defeat the
rebel armies which are arrayed against the laws and constitution
that all must respect and obey. to defeat those armies, we must
prepare the way to reach them in their recesses, provided with the
arms and instruments which enable us to accomplish our purpose.
now, i know the vindictive nature of our enemy, that we may have
many years of military operations from this quarter; and,
therefore, deem it wise and prudent to prepare in time. the use of
atlanta for warlike purposes is inconsistent with its character as
a home for families. there will be no manufactures, commerce, or
agriculture here, for the maintenance of families, and sooner or
later want will compel the inhabitants to go. why not go now, when
all the arrangements are completed for the transfer,—instead
of waiting till the plunging shot of contending armies will renew
the scenes of the past months. of course, i do not apprehend any
such thing at this moment, but you do not suppose this army will be
here until the war is over. i cannot discuss this subject with you
fairly, because i cannot impart to you what we propose to do, but i
assert that our military plans make it necessary for the
inhabitants to go away, and i can only renew my offer of services
to make their exodus in any direction as easy and comfortable as
possible.
you cannot qualify war in harsher terms than i will. war is
cruelty, and you cannot refine it; and those who brought war into
our country deserve all the curses and maledictions a people can
pour out. i know i had no hand in making this war, and i know i
will make more sacrifices to-day than any of you to secure peace.
but you cannot have peace and a division of our country. if the
united states submits to a division now, it will not stop, but will
go on until we reap the fate of mexico, which is eternal war. the
united states does and must assert its authority, wherever it once
had power; for, if it relaxes one bit to pressure, it is gone, and
i believe that such is the national feeling. this feeling assumes
various shapes, but always comes back to that of union. once admit
the union, once more acknowledge the authority of the national
government, and, instead of devoting your houses and streets and
roads to the dread uses of war, i and this army become at once your
protectors and supporters, shielding you from danger, let it come
from what quarter it may. i know that a few individuals cannot
resist a torrent of error and passion, such as swept the south into
rebellion, but you can point out, so that we may know those who
desire a government, and those who insist on war and its
desolation.
you might as well appeal against the thunder-storm as against these
terrible hardships of war. they are inevitable, and the only way
the people of atlanta can hope once more to live in peace and quiet
at home, is to stop the war, which can only be done by admitting
that it began in error and is perpetuated in pride.
we don't want your negroes, or your horses, or your houses, or your
lands, or any thing you have, but we do want and will have a just
obedience to the laws of the united states. that we will have, and,
if it involves the destruction of your improvements, we cannot help
it.
you have heretofore read public sentiment in your newspapers, that
live by falsehood and excitement; and the quicker you seek for
truth in other quarters, the better. i repeat then that, by the
original compact of government, the united states had certain
rights in georgia, which have never been relinquished and never
will be; that the south began war by seizing forts, arsenals,
mints, custom-houses, etc., etc., long before mr. lincoln was
installed, and before the south had one jot or tittle of
provocation. i myself have seen in missouri, kentucky, tennessee,
and mississippi, hundreds and thousands of women and children
fleeing from your armies and desperadoes, hungry and with bleeding
feet. in memphis, vicksburg, and mississippi, we fed thousands upon
thousands of the families of rebel soldiers left on our hands, and
whom we could not see starve. now that war comes home to you; you
feel very different. you deprecate its horrors, but did not feel
them when you sent car-loads of soldiers and ammunition, and
moulded shells and shot, to carry war into kentucky and tennessee,
to desolate the homes of hundreds and thousands of good people who
only asked to live in peace at their old homes, and under the
government of their inheritance. but these comparisons are idle. i
want peace, and believe it can only be reached through union and
war, and i will ever conduct war with a view to perfect and early
success.
but, my dear sirs, when peace does come, you may call on me for any
thing. then will i share with you the last cracker, and watch with
you to shield your homes and families against danger from every
quarter.
now you must go, and take with you the old and feeble, feed and
nurse them, and build for them, in more quiet places, proper
habitations to shield them against the weather until the mad
passions of men cool down, and allow the union and peace once more
to settle over your old homes at atlanta. yours in haste,
w. t. sherman, major-general commanding.
in the field, atlanta, georgia, september , .
general j. b. hood, commanding army of the tennessee, confederate
army.
general: yours of september th is received, and has been
carefully perused. i agree with you that this discussion by two
soldiers is out of place, and profitless; but you must admit that
you began the controversy by characterizing an official act of mine
in unfair and improper terms. i reiterate my former answer, and to
the only new matter contained in your rejoinder add: we have no
"negro allies" in this army; not a single negro soldier left
chattanooga with this army, or is with it now. there are a few
guarding chattanooga, which general steedman sent at one time to
drive wheeler out of dalton.
i was not bound by the laws of war to give notice of the shelling
of atlanta, a "fortified town, with magazines, arsenals,
founderies, and public stores;" you were bound to take notice. see
the books.
this is the conclusion of our correspondence, which i did not
begin, and terminate with satisfaction. i am, with respect, your
obedient servant,
w. t. sherman, major-general commanding.
washington, september , ,
major-general sherman, atlanta, georgia.
general: your communications of the th in regard to the removal
of families from atlanta, and the exchange of prisoners, and also
the official report of your campaign, are just received. i have not
had time as yet to examine your report. the course which you have
pursued in removing rebel families from atlanta, and in the
exchange of prisoners, is fully approved by the war department. not
only are you justified by the laws and usages of war in removing
these people, but i think it was your duty to your own army to do
so. moreover, i am fully of opinion that the nature of your
position, the character of the war, the conduct of the enemy (and
especially of non-combatants and women of the territory which we
have heretofore conquered and occupied), will justify you in
gathering up all the forage and provisions which your army may
require, both for a siege of atlanta and for your supply in your
march farther into the enemy's country. let the disloyal families
of the country, thus stripped, go to their husbands, fathers, and
natural protectors, in the rebel ranks; we have tried three years
of conciliation and kindness without any reciprocation; on the
contrary, those thus treated have acted as spies and guerrillas in
our rear and within our lines. the safety of our armies, and a
proper regard for the lives of our soldiers, require that we apply
to our inexorable foes the severe rules of war. we certainly are
not required to treat the so-called non-combatant rebels better
than they themselves treat each other. even herein virginia, within
fifty miles of washington, they strip their own families of
provisions, leaving them, as our army advances, to be fed by us, or
to starve within our lines. we have fed this class of people long
enough. let them go with their husbands and fathers in the rebel
ranks; and if they won't go, we must send them to their friends and
natural protectors. i would destroy every mill and factory within
reach which i did not want for my own use. this the rebels have
done, not only in maryland and pennsylvania, but also in virginia
and other rebel states, when compelled to fall back before our
armies. in many sections of the country they have not left a mill
to grind grain for their own suffering families, lest we might use
them to supply our armies. we most do the same.
i have endeavored to impress these views upon our commanders for
the last two years. you are almost the only one who has properly
applied them. i do not approve of general hunter's course in
burning private homes or uselessly destroying private property.
that is barbarous. but i approve of taking or destroying whatever
may serve as supplies to us or to the enemy's army.
very respectfully, your obedient servant,
h. w. halleck, major-general, chief of staff
in order to effect the exchange of prisoners, to facilitate the
exodus of the people of atlanta, and to keep open communication
with the south, we established a neutral camp, at and about the
railroad-station next south of atlanta, known as "rough and ready,"
to which point i dispatched lieutenant-colonel willard warner, of
my staff, with a guard of one hundred men, and general hood sent
colonel clare, of his staff, with a similar guard; these officers
and men harmonized perfectly, and parted good friends when their
work was done. in the mean time i also had reconnoitred the entire
rebel lines about atlanta, which were well built, but were entirely
too extensive to be held by a single corps or division of troops,
so i instructed colonel poe, united states engineers, on my staff,
to lay off an inner and shorter line, susceptible of defense by a
smaller garrison.
by the middle of september all these matters were in progress,
the reports of the past campaign were written up and dispatched to
washington, and our thoughts began to turn toward the future.
admiral farragut had boldly and successfully run the forts at the
entrance to mobile bay, which resulted in the capture of fort
morgan, so that general canby was enabled to begin his regular
operations against mobile city, with a view to open the alabama
river to navigation. my first thoughts were to concert operations
with him, either by way of montgomery, alabama, or by the
appalachicula; but so long a line, to be used as a base for further
operations eastward, was not advisable, and i concluded to await
the initiative of the enemy, supposing that he would be forced to
resort to some desperate campaign by the clamor raised at the south
on account of the great loss to them of the city of atlanta.
general thomas occupied a house on marietta streets which had a
veranda with high pillars. we were sitting there one evening,
talking about things generally, when general thomas asked leave to
send his trains back to chattanooga, for the convenience and
economy of forage. i inquired of him if he supposed we would be
allowed much rest at atlanta, and he said he thought we would, or
that at all events it would not be prudent for us to go much
farther into georgia because of our already long line of
communication, viz., three hundred miles from nashville. this was
true; but there we were, and we could not afford to remain on the
defensive, simply holding atlanta and fighting for the safety of
its railroad. i insisted on his retaining all trains, and on
keeping all his divisions ready to move at a moment's warning. all
the army, officers and men, seemed to relax more or less, and sink
into a condition of idleness. general schofield was permitted to go
to knoxville, to look after matters in his department of the ohio;
and generals blair and logan went home to look after politics. many
of the regiments were entitled to, and claimed, their discharge, by
reason of the expiration of their term of service; so that with
victory and success came also many causes of disintegration.
the rebel general wheeler was still in middle tennessee,
threatening our railroads, and rumors came that forrest was on his
way from mississippi to the same theatre, for the avowed purpose of
breaking up our railroads and compelling us to fall back from our
conquest. to prepare for this, or any other emergency, i ordered
newton's division of the fourth corps back to chattanooga, and
corse's division of the seventeenth corps to rome, and instructed
general rousseau at nashville, granger at decatur, and steadman at
chattanooga, to adopt the most active measures to protect and
insure the safety of our roads.
hood still remained about lovejoy's station, and, up to the th
of september, had given no signs of his future plans; so that with
this date i close the campaign of atlanta, with the following
review of our relative losses during the months of august and
september, with a summary of those for the whole campaign,
beginning may  and ending september , . the losses for
august and september are added together, so as to include those
about jonesboro:
killed and missing
wounded
total
grand aggregate
hood's losses, as reported for the same period, page ,
johnston's "narrative:"
killed
wounded
total
to which should be added:
prisoners captured by us:
giving his total loss
on recapitulating the entire losses of each army during the
entire campaign, from may to september, inclusive, we have, in the
union army, as per table appended:
killed
wounded
missing
aggregate loss
in the southern army, according to the reports of surgeon foard
(pp , , johnston's "narrative ")
total killed
total killed and wounded
prisoners captured by us
aggregate loss to the southern army
the foregoing figures are official, and are very nearly correct.
i see no room for error save in the cavalry, which was very much
scattered, and whose reports are much less reliable than of the
infantry and artillery; but as surgeon foard's tables do not
embrace wheeler's, jackson's, and martin's divisions of cavalry, i
infer that the comparison, as to cavalry losses, is a
"stand-off."
i have no doubt that the southern officers flattered themselves
that they had filled and crippled of us two and even six to one, as
stated by johnston; but they were simply mistaken, and i herewith
submit official tabular statements made up from the archives of the
war department, in proof thereof.
i have also had a careful tabular statement compiled from
official records in the adjutant-general's office, giving the
"effective strength" of the army under my command for each of the
months of may, june, july, august, and september, , which
enumerate every man (infantry, artillery, and cavalry) for duty.
the recapitulation clearly exhibits the actual truth. we opened the
campaign with , (ninety-eight thousand seven hundred and
ninety-seven) men. blair's two divisions joined us early in june,
giving , (one hundred and twelve thousand eight hundred and
nineteen), which number gradually became reduced to , (one
hundred and six thousand and seventy men), , (ninety-one
thousand six hundred and seventy-five), and , (eighty-one
thousand seven hundred and fifty-eight) at the end of the campaign.
this gradual reduction was not altogether owing to death and
wounds, but to the expiration of service, or by detachments sent to
points at the rear.
by the middle of september, matters and things had settled down
in atlanta, so that we felt perfectly at home. the telegraph and
railroads were repaired, and we had uninterrupted communication to
the rear. the trains arrived with regularity and dispatch, and
brought us ample supplies. general wheeler had been driven out of
middle tennessee, escaping south across the tennessee river at
bainbridge; and things looked as though we were to have a period of
repose.
one day, two citizens, messrs. hill and foster, came into our
lines at decatur, and were sent to my headquarters. they
represented themselves as former members of congress, and
particular friends of my brother john sherman; that mr. hill had a
son killed in the rebel army as it fell back before us somewhere
near cassville, and they wanted to obtain the body, having learned
from a comrade where it was buried. i gave them permission to go by
rail to the rear, with a note to the commanding officer, general
john e. smith, at cartersville, requiring him to furnish them an
escort and an ambulance for the purpose. i invited them to take
dinner with our mess, and we naturally ran into a general
conversation about politics and the devastation and ruin caused by
the war. they had seen a part of the country over which the army
had passed, and could easily apply its measure of desolation to the
remainder of the state, if necessity should compel us to go
ahead.
mr. hill resided at madison, on the main road to augusta, and
seemed to realize fully the danger; said that further resistance on
the part of the south was madness, that he hoped governor brown, of
georgia, would so proclaim it, and withdraw his people from the
rebellion, in pursuance of what was known as the policy of
"separate state action." i told him, if he saw governor brown, to
describe to him fully what he had seen, and to say that if he
remained inert, i would be compelled to go ahead, devastating the
state in its whole length and breadth; that there was no adequate
force to stop us, etc.; but if he would issue his proclamation
withdrawing his state troops from the armies of the confederacy, i
would spare the state, and in our passage across it confine the
troops to the main roads, and would, moreover, pay for all the corn
and food we needed. i also told mr. hill that he might, in my name,
invite governor brown to visit atlanta; that i would give him a
safeguard, and that if he wanted to make a speech, i would
guarantee him as full and respectable an audience as any he had
ever spoken to. i believe that mr. hill, after reaching his home at
madison, went to milledgeville, the capital of the state, and
delivered the message to governor brown. i had also sent similar
messages by judge wright of rome, georgia, and by mr. king, of
marietta. on the th of september i telegraphed to general halleck
as follows:
my report is done, and will be forwarded as soon as i get in a
few more of the subordinate reports. i am awaiting a courier from
general grant. all well; the troops are in good, healthy camps, and
supplies are coming forward finely. governor brown has disbanded
his militia, to gather the corn and sorghum of the state. i have
reason to believe that he and stephens want to visit me, and have
sent them hearty invitation. i will exchange two thousand prisoners
with hood, but no more.
governor brown's action at that time is fully explained by the
following letter, since made public, which was then only known to
us in part by hearsay:
executive department milledgeville, georgia, september ,
general j. b. hood, commanding army of tennessee.
general: as the militia of the state were called out for the
defense of atlanta during the campaign against it, which has
terminated by the fall of the city into the hands of the enemy, and
as many of these left their homes without preparation (expecting to
be gone but a few weeks), who have remained in service over three
months (most of the time in the trenches), justice requires that
they be permitted, while the enemy are preparing for the winter
campaign, to return to their homes, and look for a time after
important interests, and prepare themselves for such service as may
be required when another campaign commences against other important
points in the state. i therefore hereby withdraw said organization
from your command . . . .
this militia had composed a division under command of
major-general gustavus w. smith, and were thus dispersed to their
homes, to gather the corn and sorghum, then ripe and ready for the
harvesters.
on the th i received by telegraph from president lincoln this
dispatch:
washington, d.c., september , 
major-general sherman:
i feel great interest in the subjects of your dispatch, mentioning
corn and sorghum, and the contemplated visit to you.
a. lincoln, president of the united states.
i replied at once:
in the field, atlanta, georgia, september , .
president lincoln, washington., d. c.:
i will keep the department fully advised of all developments
connected with the subject in which you feel interested.
mr. wright, former member of congress from rome, georgia, and mr.
king, of marietta, are now going between governor brown and myself.
i have said to them that some of the people of georgia are engaged
in rebellion, began in error and perpetuated in pride, but that
georgia can now save herself from the devastations of war preparing
for her, only by withdrawing her quota out of the confederate army,
and aiding me to expel hood from the borders of the state; in which
event, instead of desolating the land as we progress, i will keep
our men to the high-roads and commons, and pay for the corn and
meat we need and take.
i am fully conscious of the delicate nature of such assertions, but
it would be a magnificent stroke of policy if we could, without
surrendering principle or a foot of ground, arouse the latent
enmity of georgia against davis.
the people do not hesitate to say that mr. stephens was and is a
union man at heart; and they say that davis will not trust him or
let him have a share in his government.
w. t. sherman, major-general.
i have not the least doubt that governor brown, at that time,
seriously entertained the proposition; but he hardly felt ready to
act, and simply gave a furlough to the militia, and called a
special session of the legislature, to meet at milledgeville, to
take into consideration the critical condition of affairs in the
state.
on the th of september colonel horace porter arrived from
general grant, at city point, bringing me the letter of september
th, asking my general views as to what should next be done. he
staid several days at atlanta, and on his return carried back to
washington my full reports of the past campaign, and my letter of
september th to general grant in answer to his of the th.
about this time we detected signs of activity on the part of the
enemy. on the st hood shifted his army across from the mason
road, at lovejoy's, to the west point road, at palmetto station,
and his cavalry appeared on the west side of the chattahoochee,
toward powder springs; thus, as it were, stepping aside, and
opening wide the door for us to enter central georgia. i inferred,
however, that his real purpose was to assume the offensive against
our railroads, and on the th a heavy force of cavalry from
mississippi, under general forrest, made its appearance at athena,
alabama, and captured its garrison.
general newton's division (of the fourth corps), and corse's (of
the seventeenth), were sent back by rail, the former to
chattanooga, and the latter to rome. on the th i telegraphed to
general halleck:
hood seems to be moving, as it were, to the alabama line,
leaving open the road to mason, as also to augusta; but his cavalry
is busy on all our roads. a force, number estimated as high as
eight thousand, are reported to have captured athena, alabama; and
a regiment of three hundred and fifty men sent to its relief. i
have sent newton's division up to chattanooga in cars, and will
send another division to rome. if i were sure that savannah would
soon be in our possession, i should be tempted to march for
milledgeville and augusta; but i must first secure what i have.
jeff. davis is at macon.
on the next day i telegraphed further that jeff. davis was with
hood at palmetto station. one of our spies was there at the time,
who came in the next night, and reported to me the substance of his
speech to the soldiers. it was a repetition of those he had made at
colombia, south carolina, and mason, georgia, on his way out, which
i had seen in the newspapers. davis seemed to be perfectly upset by
the fall of atlanta, and to have lost all sense and reason. he
denounced general jos. johnston and governor brown as little better
than traitors; attributed to them personally the many misfortunes
which had befallen their cause, and informed the soldiers that now
the tables were to be turned; that general forrest was already on
our roads in middle tennessee; and that hood's army would soon be
there. he asserted that the yankee army would have to retreat or
starve, and that the retreat would prove more disastrous than was
that of napoleon from moscow. he promised his tennessee and
kentucky soldiers that their feet should soon tread their "native
soil," etc., etc. he made no concealment of these vainglorious
boasts, and thus gave us the full key to his future designs. to be
forewarned was to be forearmed, and i think we took full advantage
of the occasion.
on the th i received this dispatch.
city point, virginia,september ,- a.m.
major-general sherman, atlanta it will be better to drive forrest
out of middle tennessee as a first step, and do any thing else you
may feel your force sufficient for. when a movement is made on any
part of the sea-coast, i will advise you. if hood goes to the
alabama line, will it not be impossible for him to subsist his
army? u. s. grant, lieutenant-general.
answer:
atlanta, georgia, september , .
general: i have your dispatch of to-day. i have already sent one
division (newton's) to chattanooga, and another (corse's) to
rome.
our armies are much reduced, and if i send back any more, i will
not be able to threaten georgia much. there are men enough to the
rear to whip forrest, but they are necessarily scattered to defend
the roads.
can you expedite the sending to nashville of the recruits that are
in indiana and ohio? they could occupy the forts.
hood is now on the west point road, twenty-four miles south of
this, and draws his supplies by that road. jefferson davis is there
to-day, and superhuman efforts will be made to break my road.
forrest is now lieutenant-general, and commands all the enemy's
cavalry.
w. t. sherman, major-general.
general grant first thought i was in error in supposing that
jeff. davis was at macon and palmetto, but on the th i received a
printed copy of his speech made at macon on the d, which was so
significant that i ordered it to be telegraphed entire as far as
louisville, to be sent thence by mail to washington, and on the
same day received this dispatch:
washington, d. c., september , - a.m.
major-general sherman, atlanta: you say jeff davis is on a visit to
general hood. i judge that brown and stephens are the objects of
his visit.
a. lincoln, president of the united states.
to which i replied:
in the field, atlanta, georgia, september , .
president lincoln, washington, d. c.:
i have positive knowledge that mr. davis made a speech at macon, on
the d, which i mailed to general halleck yesterday. it was bitter
against general jos. johnston and governor brown. the militia are
on furlough. brown is at milledgeville, trying to get a legislature
to meet next month, but he is afraid to act unless in concert with
other governors, judge wright, of rome, has been here, and messrs.
hill and nelson, former members of congress, are here now, and will
go to meet wright at rome, and then go back to madison and
milledgeville.
great efforts are being made to reenforce hood's army, and to break
up my railroads, and i should have at once a good reserve force at
nashville. it would have a bad effect, if i were forced to send
back any considerable part of my army to guard roads, so as to
weaken me to an extent that i could not act offensively if the
occasion calls for it.
w. t. sherman, major-general.
all this time hood and i were carrying on the foregoing
correspondence relating to the exchange of prisoners, the removal
of the people from atlanta, and the relief of our prisoners of war
at andersonville. notwithstanding the severity of their
imprisonment, some of these men escaped from andersonville, and got
to me at atlanta. they described their sad condition: more than
twenty-five thousand prisoners confined in a stockade designed for
only ten thousand; debarred the privilege of gathering wood out of
which to make huts; deprived of sufficient healthy food, and the
little stream that ran through their prison pen poisoned and
polluted by the offal from their cooking and butchering houses
above. on the d of september i wrote to general hood, describing
the condition of our men at andersonville, purposely refraining
from casting odium on him or his associates for the treatment of
these men, but asking his consent for me to procure from our
generous friends at the north the articles of clothing and comfort
which they wanted, viz., under-clothing, soap, combs, scissors,
etc.—all needed to keep them in health—and to send
these stores with a train, and an officer to issue them. general
hood, on the th, promptly consented, and i telegraphed to my
friend mr. james e. yeatman, vice-president of the sanitary
commission at st. louis, to send us all the under-clothing and soap
he could spare, specifying twelve hundred fine-tooth combs, and
four hundred pairs of shears to cut hair. these articles indicate
the plague that most afflicted our prisoners at andersonville.
mr. yeatman promptly responded to my request, expressed the
articles, but they did not reach andersonville in time, for the
prisoners were soon after removed; these supplies did, however,
finally overtake them at jacksonville, florida, just before the war
closed.
on the th i received from general grant two dispatches
city point, virginia; september , -. a.m. major-general
sherman: it is evident, from the tone of the richmond press and
from other sources of information, that the enemy intend making a
desperate effort to drive you from where you are. i have directed
all new troops from the west, and from the east too, if necessary,
in case none are ready in the west, to be sent to you. if general
burbridge is not too far on his way to abingdon, i think he had
better be recalled and his surplus troops sent into tennessee. u.
s. grant, lieutenant-general.
city point, virginia; september , -. a.m. major-general
sherman: i have directed all recruits and new troops from all the
western states to be sent to nashville, to receive their further
orders from you. i was mistaken about jeff. davis being in richmond
on thursday last. he was then on his way to macon. u. s. grant,
lieutenant-general.
forrest having already made his appearance in middle tennessee,
and hood evidently edging off in that direction, satisfied me that
the general movement against our roads had begun. i therefore
determined to send general thomas back to chattanooga, with another
division (morgan's, of the fourteenth corps), to meet the danger in
tennessee. general thomas went up on the th, and morgan's
division followed the same day, also by rail. and i telegraphed to
general halleck
i take it for granted that forrest will cut our road, but think
we can prevent him from making a serious lodgment. his cavalry will
travel a hundred miles where ours will ten. i have sent two
divisions up to chattanooga and one to rome, and general thomas
started to-day to drive forrest out of tennessee. our roads should
be watched from the rear, and i am glad that general grant has
ordered reserves to nashville. i prefer for the future to make the
movement on milledgeville, millen, and savannah. hood now rests
twenty-four miles south, on the chattahoochee, with his right on
the west point road. he is removing the iron of the macon road. i
can whip his infantry, but his cavalry is to be feared.
there was great difficulty in obtaining correct information
about hood's movements from palmetto station. i could not get spies
to penetrate his camps, but on the st of october i was satisfied
that the bulk of his infantry was at and across the chattahoochee
river, near campbellton, and that his cavalry was on the west side,
at powder springs. on that day i telegraphed to general grant:
hood is evidently across the chattahoochee, below sweetwater. if
he tries to get on our road, this side of the etowah, i shall
attack him; but if he goes to the selma & talladega road, why
will it not do to leave tennessee to the forces which thomas has,
and the reserves soon to come to nashville, and for me to destroy
atlanta and march across georgia to savannah or charleston,
breaking roads and doing irreparable damage? we cannot remain on
the defensive.
the selma & talladega road herein referred to was an
unfinished railroad from selma, alabama, through talladega, to blue
mountain, a terminus sixty-five miles southwest of rome and about
fifteen miles southeast of gadsden, where the rebel army could be
supplied from the direction of montgomery and mobile, and from
which point hood could easily threaten middle tennessee. my first
impression was, that hood would make for that point; but by the d
of october the indications were that he would strike our railroad
nearer us, viz., about kingston or marietta.
orders were at once made for the twentieth corps (slocum's) to
hold atlanta and the bridges of the chattahoochee, and the other
corps were put in motion for marietta.
the army had undergone many changes since the capture of
atlanta. general schofield had gone to the rear, leaving general j.
d. cog in command of the army of the ohio (twenty-third corps).
general thomas, also, had been dispatched to chattanooga, with
newton's division of the fourth corps and morgan's of the
fourteenth corps, leaving general d. s. stanley, the senior
major-general of the two corps of his army of the cumberland,
remaining and available for this movement, viz., the fourth and
fourteenth, commanded by himself and major-general jeff. c. davis;
and after general dodge was wounded, his corps (the sixteenth) had
been broken up, and its two divisions were added to the fifteenth
and seventeenth corps, constituting the army of the tennessee,
commanded by major-general o. o. howard. generals logan and blair
had gone home to assist in the political canvass, leaving their
corps, viz., the fifteenth and seventeenth, under the command of
major-generals osterhaus and t. e. g. ransom.
these five corps were very much reduced in strength, by
detachments and by discharges, so that for the purpose of fighting
hood i had only about sixty thousand infantry and artillery, with
two small divisions of cavalry (kilpatrick's and garrard's).
general elliott was the chief of cavalry to the army of the
cumberland, and was the senior officer of that arm of service
present for duty with me.
we had strong railroad guards at marietta and kenesaw,
allatoona, etowah bridge, kingston, rome, resaca, dalton, ringgold,
and chattanooga. all the important bridges were likewise protected
by good block-houses, admirably constructed, and capable of a
strong defense against cavalry or infantry; and at nearly all the
regular railroad-stations we had smaller detachments intrenched. i
had little fear of the enemy's cavalry damaging our roads
seriously, for they rarely made a break which could not be repaired
in a few days; but it was absolutely necessary to keep general
hood's infantry off our main route of communication and supply.
forrest had with him in middle tennessee about eight thousand
cavalry, and hood's army was estimated at from thirty-five to forty
thousand men, infantry and artillery, including wheeler's cavalry,
then about three thousand strong.
we crossed the chattahoochee river during the d and th of
october, rendezvoused at the old battle-field of smyrna camp, and
the next day reached marietta and kenesaw. the telegraph-wires had
been cut above marietta, and learning that heavy masses of
infantry, artillery, and cavalry, had been seen from kenesaw
(marching north), i inferred that allatoona was their objective
point; and on the th of october i signaled from mining's station
to kenesaw, and from kenesaw to allatoona, over the heads of the
enemy, a message for general corse, at rome, to hurry back to the
assistance of the garrison at allatoona. allatoona was held by, a
small brigade, commanded by lieutenant-colonel tourtellotte, my
present aide-de-camp. he had two small redoubts on either side of
the railroad, overlooking the village of allatoona, and the
warehouses, in which were stored over a million rations of
bread.
reaching kenesaw mountain about  a.m. of october th (a
beautiful day), i had a superb view of the vast panorama to the
north and west. to the southwest, about dallas, could be seen the
smoke of camp-fires, indicating the presence of a large force of
the enemy, and the whole line of railroad from big shanty up to
allatoona (full fifteen miles) was marked by the fires of the
burning railroad. we could plainly see the smoke of battle about,
allatoona, and hear the faint reverberation of the cannon.
from kenesaw i ordered the twenty-third corps (general cox) to
march due west on the burnt hickory road, and to burn houses or
piles of brush as it progressed, to indicate the head of column,
hoping to interpose this corps between hood's main army at dallas
and the detachment then assailing allatoona. the rest of the army
was directed straight for allatoona, northwest, distant eighteen
miles. the signal-officer on kenesaw reported that since daylight
he had failed to obtain any answer to his call for allatoona; but,
while i was with him, he caught a faint glimpse of the tell-tale
flag through an embrasure, and after much time he made out these
letters-" c.," "r.," "s.," "e.," "h.," "e.," "r.," and translated
the message—"corse is here." it was a source of great relief,
for it gave me the first assurance that general corse had received
his orders, and that the place was adequately garrisoned.
i watched with painful suspense the indications of the battle
raging there, and was dreadfully impatient at the slow progress of
the relieving column, whose advance was marked by the smokes which
were made according to orders, but about  p.m. i noticed with
satisfaction that the smoke of battle about allatoona grew less and
less, and ceased altogether about  p.m. for a time i attributed
this result to the effect of general cog's march, but later in the
afternoon the signal-flag announced the welcome tidings that the
attack had been fairly repulsed, but that general corse was
wounded. the next day my aide, colonel dayton, received this
characteristic dispatch:
allatoona, georgia, october , - p.m.
captain l. m. dayton, aide-de-camp:
i am short a cheek-bone and an ear, but am able to whip all
h—l yet! my losses are very heavy. a force moving from
stilesboro' to kingston gives me some anxiety. tell me where
sherman is.
john m. corse, brigadier-general.
inasmuch as the enemy had retreated southwest, and would
probably next appear at rome, i answered general corse with orders
to get back to rome with his troops as quickly as possible.
general corse's report of this fight at allatoona is very full
and graphic. it is dated rome, october , ; recites the fact
that he received his orders by signal to go to the assistance of
allatoona on the th, when he telegraphed to kingston for cars, and
a train of thirty empty cars was started for him, but about ten of
them got off the track and caused delay. by  p.m. he had at rome a
train of twenty cars, which he loaded up with colonel rowett's
brigade, and part of the twelfth illinois infantry; started at 
p.m., reached allatoona (distant thirty-five miles) at  a.m. of
the th, and sent the train back for more men; but the road was in
bad order, and no more men came in time. he found colonel
tourtellotte's garrison composed of eight hundred and ninety men;
his reenforcement was one thousand and fifty-four: total for the
defense, nineteen hundred and forty-four. the outposts were already
engaged, and as soon as daylight came he drew back the men from the
village to the ridge on which the redoubts were built.
the enemy was composed of french's division of three brigades,
variously reported from four to five thousand strong. this force
gradually surrounded the place by  a.m., when general french sent
in by flag of truce this note:
around allatoona, october , .
commanding officer, united states forces, allatoona:
i have placed the forces under my command in such positions that
you are surrounded, and to avoid a needless effusion of blood i
call on you to surrender your forces at once, and
unconditionally.
five minutes will be allowed you to decide. should you accede to
this, you will be treated in the most honorable manner as prisoners
of war.
i have the honor to be, very respectfully yours,
major-general commanding forces confederate states.
general corse answered immediately:
allatoona, georgia, october , .
major-general s. g. french, confederate states, etc:
your communication demanding surrender of my command i acknowledge
receipt of, and respectfully reply that we are prepared for the
"needless effusion of blood" whenever it is agreeable to you.
i am, very respectfully, your obedient servant,
john m. corse, brigadier-general commanding forces united
states.
of course the attack began at once, coming from front, flank,
and rear. there were two small redoubts, with slight parapets and
ditches, one on each side of the deep railroad-cut. these redoubts
had been located by colonel poe, united states engineers, at the
time of our advance on kenesaw, the previous june. each redoubt
overlooked the storehouses close by the railroad, and each could
aid the other defensively by catching in flank the attacking force
of the other. our troops at first endeavored to hold some ground
outside the redoubts, but were soon driven inside, when the enemy
made repeated assaults, but were always driven back. about  a.m.,
colonel redfield, of the thirty-ninth iowa, was killed, and colonel
rowett was wounded, but never ceased to fight and encourage his
men. colonel tourtellotte was shot through the hips, but continued
to command. general corse was, at  p.m., shot across the face, the
ball cutting his ear, which stunned him, but he continued to
encourage his men and to give orders. the enemy (about . p.m.)
made a last and desperate effort to carry one of the redoubts, but
was badly cut to pieces by the artillery and infantry fire from the
other, when he began to draw off, leaving his dead and wounded on
the ground.
before finally withdrawing, general french converged a heavy
fire of his cannon on the block-house at allatoona creek, about two
miles from the depot, set it on fire, and captured its garrison,
consisting of four officers and eighty-five men. by  p.m. he was
in full retreat south, on the dallas road, and got by before the
head of general cox's column had reached it; still several
ambulances and stragglers were picked up by this command on that
road. general corse reported two hundred and thirty-one rebel dead,
four hundred and eleven prisoners, three regimental colors, and
eight hundred muskets captured.
among the prisoners was a brigadier-general young, who thought
that french's aggregate loss would reach two thousand. colonel
tourtellotte says that, for days after general corse had returned
to rome, his men found and buried at least a hundred more dead
rebels, who had doubtless been wounded, and died in the woods near
allatoona. i know that when i reached allatoona, on the th, i saw
a good many dead men, which had been collected for burial.
corse's entire loss, officially reported, was:
killed.
wounded.
missing.
total.
i esteemed this defense of allatoona so handsome and important,
that i made it the subject of a general order, viz., no. , of
october , :
the general commanding avails himself of the opportunity, in the
handsome defense made of allatoona, to illustrate the most
important principle in war, that fortified posts should be defended
to the last, regardless of the relative numbers of the party
attacking and attacked . . . . the thanks of this army are due and
are hereby accorded to general corse, colonel tourtellotte, colonel
rowett, officers, and men, for their determined and gallant defense
of allatoona, and it is made an example to illustrate the
importance of preparing in time, and meeting the danger, when
present, boldly, manfully, and well.
commanders and garrisons of the posts along our railroad are hereby
instructed that they must hold their posts to the last minute, sure
that the time gained is valuable and necessary to their comrades at
the front.
by order of major-general w. t. sherman,
l. m. dayton, aide-a-camp.
the rebels had struck our railroad a heavy blow, burning every
tie, bending the rails for eight miles, from big shanty to above
acworth, so that the estimate for repairs called for thirty-five
thousand new ties, and six miles of iron. ten thousand men were
distributed along the break to replace the ties, and to prepare the
road-bed, while the regular repair-party, under colonel w. w.
wright, came down from chattanooga with iron, spikes, etc., and in
about seven days the road was all right again. it was by such acts
of extraordinary energy that we discouraged our adversaries, for
the rebel soldiers felt that it was a waste of labor for them to
march hurriedly, on wide circuits, day and night, to burn a bridge
and tear up a mile or so of track, when they knew that we could lay
it back so quickly. they supposed that we had men and money without
limit, and that we always kept on hand, distributed along the road,
duplicates of every bridge and culvert of any importance.
a good story is told of one who was on kenesaw mountain during
our advance in the previous june or july. a group of rebels lay in
the shade of a tree, one hot day, overlooking our camps about big
shanty. one soldier remarked to his fellows:
"well, the yanks will have to git up and git now, for i heard
general johnston himself say that general wheeler had blown up the
tunnel near dalton, and that the yanks would have to retreat,
because they could get no more rations."
"oh, hell!" said a listener, "don't you know that old sherman
carries a duplicate tunnel along?"
after the war was over, general johnston inquired of me who was
our chief railroad-engineer. when i told him that it was colonel w.
w. wright, a civilian, he was much surprised, said that our feats
of bridge-building and repairs of roads had excited his admiration;
and he instanced the occasion at kenesaw in june, when an officer
from wheeler's cavalry had reported to him in person that he had
come from general wheeler, who had made a bad break in our road
about triton station, which he said would take at least a fortnight
to repair; and, while they were talking, a train was seen coming
down the road which had passed that very break, and had reached me
at big shanty as soon as the fleet horseman had reached him
(general johnston) at marietta
i doubt whether the history of war can furnish more examples of
skill and bravery than attended the defense of the railroad from
nashville to atlanta during the year .
in person i reached allatoona on the th of october, still in
doubt as to hood's immediate intentions. our cavalry could do
little against his infantry in the rough and wooded country about
dallas, which masked the enemy's movements; but general corse, at
rome, with spencer's first alabama cavalry and a mounted regiment
of illinois infantry, could feel the country south of rome about
cedartown and villa rica; and reported the enemy to be in force at
both places. on the th i telegraphed to general thomas, at
nashville, as follows:
i came up here to relieve our road. the twentieth corps remains
at atlanta. hood reached the road and broke it up between big
shanty and acworth. he attacked allatoona, but was repulsed. we
have plenty of bread and meat, but forage is scarce. i want to
destroy all the road below chattanooga, including atlanta, and to
make for the sea-coast. we cannot defend this long line of
road.
and on the same day i telegraphed to general grant, at city
point:
it will be a physical impossibility to protect the roads, now that
hood, forrest, wheeler, and the whole batch of devils, are turned
loose without home or habitation. i think hood's movements indicate
a diversion to the end of the selma & talladega road, at blue
mountain, about sixty miles southwest of rome, from which he will
threaten kingston, bridgeport, and decatur, alabama. i propose that
we break up the railroad from ohattanooga forward, and that we
strike out with our wagons for milledgeville, millen, and savannah.
until we can repopulate georgia, it is useless for us to occupy it;
but the utter destruction of its roads, houses, and people, will
cripple their military resources. by attempting to hold the roads,
we will lose a thousand men each month, and will gain no result. i
can make this march, and make georgia howl! we have on hand over
eight thousand head of cattle and three million rations of bread,
but no corn. we can find plenty of forage in the interior of the
state.
meantime the rebel general forrest had made a bold circuit in
middle tennessee, avoiding all fortified points, and breaking up
the railroad at several places; but, as usual, he did his work so
hastily and carelessly that our engineers soon repaired the
damage—then, retreating before general rousseau, he left the
state of tennessee, crossing the river near florence, alabama, and
got off unharmed.
on the th of october the enemy appeared south of the etowah river
at rome, when i ordered all the armies to march to kingston, rode
myself to cartersville with the twenty-third corps (general cox),
and telegraphed from there to general thomas at nashville:
it looks to me as though hood was bound for tuscumbia. he is now
crossing the coosa river below rome, looking west. let me know if
you can hold him with your forces now in tennessee and the expected
reenforeements, as, in that event, you know what i propose to
do.
i will be at kingston to-morrow. i think rome is strong enough to
resist any attack, and the rivers are all high. if he turns up by
summerville, i will get in behind him.
and on the same day to general grant, at city point:
hood is now crossing the coosa, twelve miles below rome, bound
west. if he passes over to the mobile & ohio railroad, had i
not better execute the plan of my letter sent you by colonel
porter, and leave general thomas, with the troops now in tennessee,
to defend the state? he will have an ample force when the
reenforcements ordered reach nashville.
i found general john e. smith at cartersville, and on the th rode
on to kingston, where i had telegraphic communications in all
directions.
from general corse, at rome, i learned that hood's army had
disappeared, but in what direction he was still in doubt; and i was
so strongly convinced of the wisdom of my proposition to change the
whole tactics of the campaign, to leave hood to general thomas, and
to march across georgia for savannah or charleston, that i again
telegraphed to general grant:
we cannot now remain on the defensive. with twenty-five thousand
infantry and the bold cavalry he has, hood can constantly break my
road. i would infinitely prefer to make a wreck of the road and of
the country from chattanooga to atlanta, including the latter city;
send back all my wounded and unserviceable men, and with my
effective army move through georgia, smashing things to the sea.
hood may turn into tennessee and kentucky, but i believe he will be
forced to follow me. instead of being on the defensive, i will be
on the offensive. instead of my guessing at what he means to do, he
will have to guess at my plans. the difference in war would be
fully twenty-five per pent. i can make savannah, charleston, or the
month of the chattahoochee (appalachicola). answer quick, as i know
we will not have the telegraph long.
i received no answer to this at the time, and the next day went
on to rome, where the news came that hood had made his appearance
at resaca, and had demanded the surrender of the place, which was
commanded by colonel weaver, reenforced by brevet brigadier-general
raum. general hood had evidently marched with rapidity up the
chattooga valley, by summerville, lafayette, ship's gap, and
snake-creek gap, and had with him his whole army, except a small
force left behind to watch rome. i ordered resaca to be further
reenforced by rail from kingston, and ordered general cox to make a
bold reconnoissance down the coosa valley, which captured and
brought into rome some cavalrymen and a couple of field-guns, with
their horses and men. at first i thought of interposing my whole
army in the chattooga valley, so as to prevent hood's escape south;
but i saw at a glance that he did not mean to fight, and in that
event, after damaging the road all he could, he would be likely to
retreat eastward by spring place, which i did not want him to do;
and, hearing from general raum that he still held resaca safe, and
that general edward mccook had also got there with some cavalry
reenforcements, i turned all the heads of columns for resaca, viz.,
general cox's, from rome; general stanley's, from mcguire's; and
general howard's, from kingston. we all reached resaca during that
night, and the next morning (th) learned that hood's whole army
had passed up the valley toward dalton, burning the railroad and
doing all the damage possible.
on the th he had demanded the surrender of resaca in the
following letter
headquarters army of tennessee in the field, october ,.
to the officer commanding the united stales forces at resaca,
georgia.
sir: i demand the immediate and unconditional surrender of the post
and garrison under your command, and, should this be acceded to,
all white officers and soldiers will be parolled in a few days. if
the place is carried by assault, no prisoners will be taken. most
respectfully, your obedient servant,
j. b. hood, general.
to this colonel weaver, then in command, replied:
resaca, georgia, october , .
to general j. b. hood
your communication of this date just received. in reply, i have to
state that i am somewhat surprised at the concluding paragraph, to
the effect that, if the place is carried by assault, no prisoners
will be taken. in my opinion i can hold this post. if you want it,
come and take it.
i am, general, very respectfully, your most obedient servant,
clark r. weaver, commanding officer.
this brigade was very small, and as hood's investment extended
only from the oostenaula, below the town, to the connesauga above,
he left open the approach from the south, which enabled general
raum and the cavalry of generals mccook and watkins to reenforce
from kingston. in fact, hood, admonished by his losses at
allatoona, did not attempt an assault at all, but limited his
attack to the above threat, and to some skirmishing, giving his
attention chiefly to the destruction of the railroad, which he
accomplished all the way up to tunnel hill, nearly twenty miles,
capturing en route the regiment of black troops at dalton
(johnson's forty-fourth united states colored). on the th, i
turned general howard through snake-creek gap, and sent general
stanley around by tilton, with orders to cross the mountain to the
west, so as to capture, if possible, the force left by the enemy in
snake-creek gap. we found this gap very badly obstructed by fallen
timber, but got through that night, and the next day the main army
was at villanow. on the morning of the th, the leading division
of general howard's column, commanded by general charles r. woods,
carried ship's gap, taking prisoners part of the twenty-fourth
south carolina regiment, which had been left there to hold us in
check.
the best information there obtained located hood's army at
lafayette, near which place i hoped to catch him and force him to
battle; but, by the time we had got enough troops across the
mountain at ship's gap, hood had escaped down the valley of the
chattooga, and all we could do was to follow him as closely as
possible. from ship's gap i dispatched couriers to chattanooga, and
received word back that general schofield was there, endeavoring to
cooperate with me, but hood had broken up the telegraph, and thus
had prevented quick communication. general schofield did not reach
me till the army had got down to gaylesville, about the st of
october.
it was at ship's gap that a courier brought me the cipher
message from general halleck which intimated that the authorities
in washington were willing i should undertake the march across
georgia to the sea. the translated dispatch named "horse-i-bar
sound" as the point where the fleet would await my arrival. after
much time i construed it to mean, "ossabaw sound," below savannah,
which was correct.
on the th i telegraphed to general thomas, at nashville:
send me morgan's and newton's old divisions. reestablish the road,
and i will follow hood wherever he may go. i think he will move to
blue mountain. we can maintain our men and animals on the
country.
general thomas's reply was:
nashville, october , —. a.m.
major-general sherman:
your dispatch from ship's gap,  p.m. of the th, just received.
schofield, whom i placed in command of the two divisions (wagner's
and morgan's), was to move up lookout valley this a.m., to
intercept hood, should he be marching for bridgeport. i will order
him to join you with the two divisions, and will reconstruct the
road as soon as possible. will also reorganize the guards for posts
and block-houses .... mower and wilson have arrived, and are on
their way to join you. i hope you will adopt grant's idea of
turning wilson loose, rather than undertake the plan of a march
with the whole force through georgia to the sea, inasmuch as
general grant cannot cooperate with you as at first arranged.
george h. thomas, major-general.
so it is clear that at that date neither general grant nor
general thomas heartily favored my proposed plan of campaign. on
the same day, i wrote to general schofield at chattanooga:
hood is not at dear head cove. we occupy ship's gap and lafayette.
hood is moving south via summerville, alpine, and gadsden. if he
enters tennessee, it will be to the west of huntsville, but i think
he has given up all such idea. i want the road repaired to atlanta;
the sick and wounded men sent north of the tennessee; my army
recomposed; and i will then make the interior of georgia feel the
weight of war. it is folly for us to be moving our armies on the
reports of scouts and citizens. we must maintain the offensive.
your first move on trenton and valley head was right —the
move to defend caperton's ferry is wrong. notify general thomas of
these my views. we must follow hood till he is beyond the reach of
mischief, and then resume the offensive.
the correspondence between me and the authorities at washington,
as well as with the several army commanders, given at length in the
report of the committee on the conduct of the war, is full on all
these points.
after striking our road at dalton, hood was compelled to go on
to chattanooga and bridgeport, or to pass around by decatur and
abandon altogether his attempt to make us let go our hold of
atlanta by attacking our communications. it was clear to me that he
had no intention to meet us in open battle, and the lightness and
celerity of his army convinced me that i could not possibly catch
him on a stern-chase. we therefore quietly followed him down the
chattooga valley to the neighborhood of gadsden, but halted the
main armies near the coosa river, at the mouth of the chattooga,
drawing our supplies of corn and meat from the farms of that
comparatively rich valley and of the neighborhood.
general slocum, in atlanta, had likewise sent out, under strong
escort, large trains of wagons to the east, and brought back corn,
bacon, and all kinds of provisions, so that hood's efforts to cut
off our supplies only reacted on his own people. so long as the
railroads were in good order, our supplies came full and regular
from the north; but when the enemy broke our railroads we were
perfectly justified in stripping the inhabitants of all they had. i
remember well the appeal of a very respectable farmer against our
men driving away his fine flock of sheep. i explained to him that
general hood had broken our railroad; that we were a strong, hungry
crowd, and needed plenty of food; that uncle sam was deeply
interested in our continued health and would soon repair these
roads, but meantime we must eat; we preferred illinois beef, but
mutton would have to answer. poor fellow! i don't believe he was
convinced of the wisdom or wit of my explanation. very soon after
reaching lafayette we organized a line of supply from chattanooga
to ringgold by rail, and thence by wagons to our camps about
gaylesville. meantime, also, hood had reached the neighborhood of
gadsden, and drew his supplies from the railroad at blue
mountain.
on the th of october i telegraphed to general halleck, at
washington:
hood has retreated rapidly by all the roads leading south. our
advance columns are now at alpine and melville post-office. i shall
pursue him as far as gaylesville. the enemy will not venture toward
tennessee except around by decatur. i propose to send the fourth
corps back to general thomas, and leave him, with that corps, the
garrisons, and new troops, to defend the line of the tennessee
river; and with the rest i will push into the heart of georgia and
come out at savannah, destroying all the railroads of the state.
the break in our railroad at big shanty is almost repaired, and
that about dalton should be done in ten days. we find abundance of
forage in the country.
on the same day i telegraphed to general l. c. easton,
chief-quartermaster, who had been absent on a visit to missouri,
but had got back to chattanooga:
go in person to superintend the repairs of the railroad, and make
all orders in my name that will expedite its completion. i want it
finished, to bring back from atlanta to chattanooga the sick and
wounded men and surplus stores. on the st of november i want
nothing in front of chattanooga except what we can use as food and
clothing and haul in our wagons. there is plenty of corn in the
country, and we only want forage for the posts. i allow ten days
for all this to be done, by which time i expect to be at or near
atlanta.
i telegraphed also to general amos beckwith, chief-commissary in
atlanta, who was acting as chief-quartermaster during the absence
of general easton:
hood will escape me. i want to prepare for my big raid.
on the st of november i want nothing in atlanta but what is
necessary for war. send all trash to the rear at once, and have on
hand thirty days' food and but little forage. i propose to abandon
atlanta, and the railroad back to chattanooga, to sally forth to
ruin georgia and bring up on the seashore. make all dispositions
accordingly. i will go down the coosa until i am sure that hood has
gone to blue mountain.
on the st of october i reached gaylesville, had my bivouac in
an open field back of the village, and remained there till the
th. during that time general schofield arrived, with the two
divisions of generals wagner (formerly newton's) and morgan, which
were returned to their respective corps (the fourth and
fourteenth), and general schofield resumed his own command of the
army of the ohio, then on the coosa river, near cedar bluff.
general joseph a. mower also arrived, and was assigned to command a
division in the seventeenth corps; and general j. h. wilson came,
having been sent from virginia by general grant, for the purpose of
commanding all my cavalry. i first intended to organize this
cavalry into a corps of three small divisions, to be commanded by
general wilson; but the horses were well run down, and, at wilson's
instance, i concluded to retain only one division of four thousand
five hundred men, with selected horses, under general kilpatrick,
and to send general wilson back with all the rest to nashville, to
be reorganized and to act under general thomas in the defense of
tennessee. orders to this effect were made on the th of
october.
general grant, in designating general wilson to command my
cavalry, predicted that he would, by his personal activity,
increase the effect of that arm "fifty per cent.," and he advised
that he should be sent south, to accomplish all that i had proposed
to do with the main army; but i had not so much faith in cavalry as
he had, and preferred to adhere to my original intention of going
myself with a competent force.
about this time i learned that general beauregard had reached
hood's army at gadsden; that, without assuming direct command of
that army, he had authority from the confederate government to
direct all its movements, and to call to his assistance the whole
strength of the south. his orders, on assuming command, were full
of alarm and desperation, dated:
october , 
in assuming command, at this critical juncture, of the military
division of the west, i appeal to my countrymen, of all classes and
sections, for their generous support. in assigning me to this
responsible position, the president of the confederate states has
extended to me the assurance of his earnest support. the executives
of your states meet me with similar expressions of their devotion
to our cause. the noble army in the field, composed of brave men
and gallant officers, are strangers to me, but i know they will do
all that patriots can achieve.....
the army of sherman still defiantly holds atlanta. he can and must
be driven from it. it is only for the good people of georgia and
surrounding states to speak the word, and the work is done, we have
abundant provisions. there are men enough in the country, liable to
and able for service, to accomplish the result.....
my countrymen, respond to this call as you have done in days that
are past, and, with the blessing of a kind and overruling
providence, the enemy shall be driven from your soil. the security
of your wives and daughters from the insults and outrages of a
brutal foe shall be established soon, and be followed by a
permanent and honorable peace. the claims of home and country, wife
and children, uniting with the demands of honor and patriotism,
summon us to the field. we cannot, dare not, will not fail to
respond. full of hope and confidence, i come to join you in your
struggles, sharing your privations, and, with your brave and true
men, to strike the blow that shall bring success to our arms,
triumph to our cause, and peace to our country! . . .
g. t. beauregard, general.
notwithstanding this somewhat boastful order or appeal, general
beauregard did not actually accompany general hood on his
disastrous march to nashville, but took post at corinth,
mississippi, to control the movement of his supplies and to watch
me.
at gaylesville the pursuit of hood by the army under my
immediate command may be said to have ceased. during this pursuit,
the fifteenth corps was commanded by its senior major-general
present, p. j. osterhaus, in the absence of general john a. logan;
and the seventeenth corps was commanded by brigadier-general t. e.
g. ransom, the senior officer present, in the absence of general
frank p. blair.
general ransom was a young, most gallant, and promising officer,
son of the colonel ransom who was killed at chapultepec, in the
mexican war. he had served with the army of the tennessee in 
and , at vicksburg, where he was severely wounded. he was not
well at the time we started from atlanta, but he insisted on going
along with his command. his symptoms became more aggravated on the
march, and when we were encamped near gaylesville, i visited him in
company with surgeon john moors, united states army, who said that
the case was one of typhoid fever, which would likely prove fatal.
a few days after, viz., the th, he was being carried on a litter
toward rome; and as i rode from gaylesville to rome, i passed him
by the way, stopped, and spoke with him, but did not then suppose
he was so near his end. the next day, however, his escort reached
rome, bearing his dead body. the officer in charge reported that,
shortly after i had passed, his symptoms became so much worse that
they stopped at a farmhouse by the road-side, where he died that
evening. his body was at once sent to chicago for burial, and a
monument has been ordered by the society of the army of the
tennessee to be erected in his memory.
on the th of october i learned that hood's whole army had made
its appearance about decatur, alabama, and at once caused a strong
reconnoissance to be made down the coosa to near gadsden, which
revealed the truth that the enemy was gone except a small force of
cavalry, commanded by general wheeler, which had been left to watch
us. i then finally resolved on my future course, which was to leave
hood to be encountered by general thomas, while i should carry into
full effect the long-contemplated project of marching for the
sea-coast, and thence to operate toward richmond. but it was
all-important to me and to our cause that general thomas should
have an ample force, equal to any and every emergency.
he then had at nashville about eight or ten thousand new troops,
and as many more civil employs of the quartermaster's department,
which were not suited for the field, but would be most useful in
manning the excellent forts that already covered nashville. at
chattanooga, he had general steedman's division, about five
thousand men, besides garrisons for chattanooga, bridgeport, and
stevenson; at murfreesboro' he also had general rousseau's
division, which was full five thousand strong, independent of the
necessary garrisons for the railroad. at decatur and huntsville,
alabama, was the infantry division of general r. s. granger,
estimated at four thousand; and near florence, alabama, watching
the crossings of the tennessee, were general edward hatch's
division of cavalry, four thousand; general croxton's brigade,
twenty-five hundred; and colonel capron's brigade, twelve hundred;
besides which, general j. h. wilson had collected in nashville
about ten thousand dismounted cavalry, for which he was rapidly
collecting the necessary horses for a remount. all these aggregated
about forty-five thousand men. general a. j. smith at that time was
in missouri, with the two divisions of the sixteenth corps which
had been diverted to that quarter to assist general rosecrans in
driving the rebel general price out of missouri. this object had
been accomplished, and these troops, numbering from eight to ten
thousand, had been ordered to nashville. to these i proposed at
first to add only the fourth corps (general stanley), fifteen
thousand; and that corps was ordered from gaylesville to march to
chattanooga, and thence report for orders to general thomas; but
subsequently, on the th of october, at rome, georgia, learning
from general thomas that the new troops promised by general grant
were coming forward very slowly, i concluded to further reenforce
him by general schofield's corps (twenty-third), twelve thousand,
which corps accordingly marched for resaca, and there took the cars
for chattanooga. i then knew that general thomas would have an
ample force with which to encounter general hood anywhere in the
open field, besides garrisons to secure the railroad to his rear
and as far forward as chattanooga. and, moreover, i was more than
convinced that he would have ample time for preparation; for, on
that very day, general r. s. granger had telegraphed me from
decatur, alabama:
i omitted to mention another reason why hood will go to
tusomnbia before crossing the tennessee river. he was evidently out
of supplies. his men were all grumbling; the first thing the
prisoners asked for was something to eat. hood could not get any
thing if he should cross this side of rogersville.
i knew that the country about decatur and tuscumbia, alabama,
was bare of provisions, and inferred that general hood would have
to draw his supplies, not only of food, but of stores, clothing,
and ammunition, from mobile, montgomery, and selma, alabama, by the
railroad around by meridian and corinth, mississippi, which we had
most effectually disabled the previous winter.
general hood did not make a serious attack on decatur, but hung
around it from october th to the th, when he drew off and
marched for a point on the south side of the tennessee river,
opposite florence, where he was compelled to remain nearly a month,
to collect the necessary supplies for his contemplated invasion of
tennessee and kentucky.
the fourth corps (stanley) had already reached chattanooga, and
had been transported by rail to pulaski, tennessee; and general
thomas ordered general schofield, with the twenty-third corps, to
columbia, tennessee, a place intermediate between hood (then on the
tennessee river, opposite florence) and forrest, opposite
johnsonville.
on the st of october general croxton, of the cavalry, reported
that the enemy had crossed the tennessee river four miles above
florence, and that he had endeavored to stop him, but without
success. still, i was convinced that hood's army was in no
condition to march for nashville, and that a good deal of further
delay might reasonably be counted on. i also rested with much
confidence on the fact that the tennessee river below muscle shoals
was strongly patrolled by gunboats, and that the reach of the river
above muscle shoals, from decatur as high up as our railroad at
bridgeport, was also guarded by gunboats, so that hood, to cross
over, would be compelled to select a point inaccessible to these
gunboats. he actually did choose such a place, at the old
railroad-piers, four miles above florence, alabama, which is below
muscle shoals and above colbert shoals.
on the st of october forrest made his appearance on the
tennessee river opposite johnsonville (whence a new railroad led to
nashville), and with his cavalry and field pieces actually crippled
and captured two gunboats with five of our transports, a feat of
arms which, i confess, excited my admiration.
there is no doubt that the month of october closed to us looking
decidedly squally; but, somehow, i was sustained in the belief that
in a very few days the tide would turn.
on the st of november i telegraphed very fully to general
grant, at city point, who must have been disturbed by the wild
rumors that filled the country, and on the d of november received
(at rome) this dispatch:
city point, november , — p.m.
major-general sherman:
do you not think it advisable, now that hood has gone so far north,
to entirely ruin him before starting on your proposed campaign?
with hood's army destroyed, you can go where you please with
impunity. i believed and still believe, if you had started south
while hood was in the neighborhood of you, he would have been
forced to go after you. now that he is far away he might look upon
the chase as useless, and he will go in one direction while you are
pushing in the other. if you can see a chance of destroying hood's
army, attend to that first, and make your other move
secondary.
u. s. grant, lieutenant-general.
my answer is dated:
rome, georgia, november , .
lieutenant-general u. s. grant, city point, virginia:
your dispatch is received. if i could hope to overhaul hood, i
would turn against him with my whole force; then he would retreat
to the south west, drawing me as a decoy away from georgia, which
is his chief object. if he ventures north of the tennessee river, i
may turn in that direction, and endeavor to get below him on his
line of retreat; but thus far he has not gone above the tennessee
river. general thomas will have a force strong enough to prevent
his reaching any country in which we have an interest; and he has
orders, if hood turns to follow me, to push for selma, alabama. no
single army can catch hood, and i am convinced the best results
will follow from our defeating jeff. davis's cherished plea of
making me leave georgia by manoeuvring. thus far i have confined my
efforts to thwart this plan, and have reduced baggage so that i can
pick up and start in any direction; but i regard the pursuit of
hood as useless. still, if he attempts to invade middle tennessee,
i will hold decatur, and be prepared to move in that direction;
but, unless i let go of atlanta, my force will not be equal to
his.
w. t. sherman, major-general.
by this date, under the intelligent and energetic action of
colonel w. w. wright, and with the labor of fifteen hundred men,
the railroad break of fifteen miles about dalton was repaired so
far as to admit of the passage of cars, and i transferred my
headquarters to kingston as more central; and from that place, on
the same day (november d), again telegraphed to general
grant:
kingston, georgia, november , .
lieutenant-general u. s. grant, city point, virginia: if i turn
back, the whole effect of my campaign will be lost. by my movements
i have thrown beauregard (hood) well to the west, and thomas will
have ample time and sufficient troops to hold him until the
reenforcements from missouri reach him. we have now ample supplies
at chattanooga and atlanta, and can stand a month's interruption to
our communications. i do not believe the confederate army can reach
our railroad-lines except by cavalry-raids, and wilson will have
cavalry enough to checkmate them. i am clearly of opinion that the
best results will follow my contemplated movement through
georgia.
w. t. sherman, major-general.
that same day i received, in answer to the rome dispatch, the
following:
city point, virginia, november ,—. a.m.
major-general sherman:
your dispatch of  a.m. yesterday is just received. i dispatched
you the same date, advising that hood's army, now that it had
worked so far north, ought to be looked upon now as the "object."
with the force, however, that you have left with general thomas, he
must be able to take care of hood and destroy him.
i do not see that you can withdraw from where you are to follow
hood, without giving up all we have gained in territory. i say,
then, go on as you propose.
u. s. grant, lieutenant-general,
this was the first time that general grant ordered the "march to
the sea," and, although many of his warm friends and admirers
insist that he was the author and projector of that march, and that
i simply executed his plans, general grant has never, in my
opinion, thought so or said so. the truth is fully given in an
original letter of president lincoln, which i received at savannah,
georgia, and have at this instant before me, every word of which is
in his own familiar handwriting. it is dated—
washington, december , .
when you were about leaving atlanta for the atlantic coast, i was
anxious, if not fearful; but, feeling that you were the better
judge, and remembering "nothing risked, nothing gained," i did not
interfere. now, the undertaking being a success, the honor is all
yours; for i believe none of us went further than to acquiesce;
and, taking the work of general thomas into account, as it should
be taken, it is indeed a great success. not only does it afford the
obvious and immediate military advantages, but, in showing to the
world that your army could be divided, putting the stronger part to
an important new service, and yet leaving enough to vanquish the
old opposing force of the whole, hood's army, it brings those who
sat in darkness to see a great light. but what next? i suppose it
will be safer if i leave general grant and yourself to
decide.
of course, this judgment; made after the event, was extremely
flattering and was all i ever expected, a recognition of the truth
and of its importance. i have often been asked, by well-meaning
friends, when the thought of that march first entered my mind. i
knew that an army which had penetrated georgia as far as atlanta
could not turn back. it must go ahead, but when, how, and where,
depended on many considerations. as soon as hood had shifted across
from lovejoy's to palmetto, i saw the move in my "mind's eye;" and,
after jeff. davis's speech at palmetto, of september th, i was
more positive in my conviction, but was in doubt as to the time and
manner. when general hood first struck our railroad above marietta,
we were not ready, and i was forced to watch his movements further,
till he had "carromed" off to the west of decatur. then i was
perfectly convinced, and had no longer a shadow of doubt. the only
possible question was as to thomas's strength and ability to meet
hood in the open field. i did not suppose that general hood, though
rash, would venture to attack fortified places like allatoona,
resaca, decatur, and nashville; but he did so, and in so doing he
played into our hands perfectly.
on the d of november i was at kingston, georgia, and my four
corps—the fifteenth, seventeenth, fourteenth, and
twentieth—with one division of cavalry, were strung from rome
to atlanta. our railroads and telegraph had been repaired, and i
deliberately prepared for the march to savannah, distant three
hundred miles from atlanta. all the sick and wounded men had been
sent back by rail to chattanooga; all our wagon-trains had been
carefully overhauled and loaded, so as to be ready to start on an
hour's notice, and there was no serious enemy in our front.
general hood remained still at florence, alabama, occupying both
banks of the tennessee river, busy in collecting shoes and clothing
for his men, and the necessary ammunition and stores with which to
invade tennessee, most of which had to come from mobile, selma, and
montgomery, alabama, over railroads that were still broken.
beauregard was at corinth, hastening forward these necessary
preparations.
general thomas was at nashville, with wilson's dismounted
cavalry and a mass of new troops and quartermaster's employs amply
sufficient to defend the place. the fourth and twenty-third corps,
under generals stanley and schofield were posted at pulaski,
tennessee, and the cavalry of hatch, croxton, and capron, were
about florence, watching hood. smith's (a. j.) two divisions of the
sixteenth corps were still in missouri, but were reported as ready
to embark at lexington for the cumberland river and nashville. of
course, general thomas saw that on him would likely fall the real
blow, and was naturally anxious. he still kept granger's division
at decatur, rousseau's at murfreesboro', and steedman's at
chattanooga, with strong railroad guards at all the essential
points intermediate, confident that by means of this very railroad
he could make his concentration sooner than hood could possibly
march up from florence.
meantime, general f. p. blair had rejoined his corps
(seventeenth), and we were receiving at kingston recruits and
returned furlough-men, distributing them to their proper companies.
paymasters had come down to pay off our men before their departure
to a new sphere of action, and commissioners were also on hand from
the several states to take the vote of our men in the presidential
election then agitating the country.
on the th of november, at kingston, i wrote and telegraphed to
general grant, reviewing the whole situation, gave him my full plan
of action, stated that i was ready to march as soon as the election
was over, and appointed november th as the day for starting. on
the th i received this dispatch:
city point, virginia, november , -. p.m.
major-general sherman:
your dispatch of this evening received. i see no present reason for
changing your plan. should any arise, you will see it, or if i do i
will inform you. i think everything here is favorable now. great
good fortune attend you! i believe you will be eminently
successful, and, at worst, can only make a march less fruitful of
results than hoped for.
u. s. grant, lieutenant-general.
meantime trains of cars were whirling by, carrying to the rear
an immense amount of stores which had accumulated at atlanta, and
at the other stations along the railroad; and general steedman had
come down to kingston, to take charge of the final evacuation and
withdrawal of the several garrisons below chattanooga.
on the th of november the movement may be said to have fairly
begun. all the troops designed for the campaign were ordered to
march for atlanta, and general corse, before evacuating his post at
rome, was ordered to burn all the mills, factories, etc., etc.,
that could be useful to the enemy, should he undertake to pursue
us, or resume military possession of the country. this was done on
the night of the th, and next day corse reached kingston. on the
th general thomas and i interchanged full dispatches. he had
heard of the arrival of general a. j. smith's two divisions at
paducah, which would surely reach nashville much sooner than
general hood could possibly do from florence, so that he was
perfectly satisfied with his share of the army.
on the th, with a full staff, i started from kingston for
atlanta; and about noon of that day we reached cartersville, and
sat on the edge of a porch to rest, when the telegraph operator,
mr. van valkenburg, or eddy, got the wire down from the poles to
his lap, in which he held a small pocket instrument. calling
"chattanooga," he received this message from general thomas,
dated:
nashville, november , —. a.m.
major-general sherman:
your dispatch of twelve o'clock last night is received. i have no
fears that beauregard can do us any harm now, and, if he attempts
to follow you, i will follow him as far as possible. if he does not
follow you, i will then thoroughly organize my troops, and believe
i shall have men enough to ruin him unless he gets out of the way
very rapidly.
the country of middle alabama, i learn, is teeming with supplies
this year, which will be greatly to our advantage. i have no
additional news to report from the direction of florence. i am now
convinced that the greater part of beauregard's army is near
florence and tuscumbia, and that you will have at least a clear
road before you for several days, and that your success will fully
equal your expectations.
george h. thomas, major-general.
i answered simply: "dispatch received—all right." about
that instant of time, some of our men burnt a bridge, which severed
the telegraph-wire, and all communication with the rear ceased
thenceforth.
as we rode on toward atlanta that night, i remember the
railroad-trains going to the rear with a furious speed; the
engineers and the few men about the trains waving us an
affectionate adieu. it surely was a strange event—two hostile
armies marching in opposite directions, each in the full belief
that it was achieving a final and conclusive result in a great war;
and i was strongly inspired with the feeling that the movement on
our part was a direct attack upon the rebel army and the rebel
capital at richmond, though a full thousand miles of hostile
country intervened, and that, for better or worse, it would end the
war.
on the th of november the railroad and telegraph
communications with the rear were broken, and the army stood
detached from all friends, dependent on its own resources and
supplies. no time was to be lost; all the detachments were ordered
to march rapidly for atlanta, breaking up the railroad en route,
and generally to so damage the country as to make it untenable to
the enemy. by the th all the troops had arrived at or near
atlanta, and were, according to orders, grouped into two wings, the
right and left, commanded respectively by major-generals o. o.
howard and h. w. slocum, both comparatively young men, but educated
and experienced officers, fully competent to their command.
the right wing was composed of the fifteenth corps,
major-general p. j. osterhaus commanding, and the seventeenth
corps, major-general frank p. blair commanding.
the left wing was composed of the fourteenth corps,
major-general jefferson c. davis commanding, and the twentieth
corps, brigadier-general a. s. williams commanding.
the fifteenth corps had four divisions, commanded by
brigadier-generals charles r. woods, w. b. hazen, john e. smith,
and john m. gorse.
the seventeenth corps had three divisions, commanded by
major-general j. a. mower, and brigadier-generals m. d. leggett ad
giles a. smith.
the fourteenth corps had three divisions, commanded by
brigadier-generals w. p. carlin, james d. morgan, and a. baird.
the twentieth corps had also three divisions, commanded by
brigadier-generals n. j. jackson, john w. geary, and w. t.
ward.
the cavalry division was held separate, subject to my own
orders. it was commanded by brigadier-general judson kilpatrick,
and was composed of two brigades, commanded by colonels eli h.
murray, of kentucky, and smith d. atkins, of illinois.
the strength of the army, as officially reported, is given in
the following tables, and shows an aggregate of fifty-five thousand
three hundred and twenty-nine infantry, five thousand and
sixty-three cavalry, and eighteen hundred and twelve artillery in
all, sixty-two thousand two hundred and four officers and men.
the most extraordinary efforts had been made to purge this army
of non-combatants and of sick men, for we knew well that there was
to be no place of safety save with the army itself; our wagons were
loaded with ammunition, provisions, and forage, and we could ill
afford to haul even sick men in the ambulances, so that all on this
exhibit may be assumed to have been able-bodied, experienced
soldiers, well armed, well equipped and provided, as far as human
foresight could, with all the essentials of life, strength, and
vigorous action.
the two general orders made for this march appear to me, even at
this late day, so clear, emphatic, and well-digested, that no
account of that historic event is perfect without them, and i give
them entire, even at the seeming appearance of repetition; and,
though they called for great sacrifice and labor on the part of the
officers and men, i insist that these orders were obeyed as well as
any similar orders ever were, by an army operating wholly in an
enemy's country, and dispersed, as we necessarily were, during the
subsequent period of nearly six months.
[special field orders, no. .]
in the field, kingston, georgia, november , 
the general commanding deems it proper at this time to inform the
officers and men of the fourteenth, fifteenth, seventeenth, and
twentieth corps, that he has organized them into an army for a
special purpose, well known to the war department and to general
grant. it is sufficient for you to know that it involves a
departure from our present base, and a long and difficult march to
a new one. all the chances of war have been considered and provided
for, as far as human sagacity can. all he asks of you is to
maintain that discipline, patience, and courage, which have
characterized you in the past; and he hopes, through you, to strike
a blow at our enemy that will have a material effect in producing
what we all so much desire, his complete overthrow. of all things,
the most important is, that the men, during marches and in camp,
keep their places and do not scatter about as stragglers or
foragers, to be picked up by a hostile people in detail. it is also
of the utmost importance that our wagons should not be loaded with
any thing but provisions and ammunition. all surplus servants,
noncombatants, and refugees, should now go to the rear, and none
should be encouraged to encumber us on the march. at some future
time we will be able to provide for the poor whites and blacks who
seek to escape the bondage under which they are now suffering. with
these few simple cautions, he hopes to lead you to achievements
equal in importance to those of the past.
by order of major-general w. t. sherman, l. m. dayton,
aide-de-camp.
[special field orders, no. .]
in the field, kingston, georgia, november , 
. for the purpose of military operations, this army is divided
into two wings viz.:
the right wing, major-general o. o. howard commanding, composed of
the fifteenth and seventeenth corps; the left wing, major-general
h. w. slocum commanding, composed of the fourteenth and twentieth
corps.
. the habitual order of march will be, wherever practicable, by
four roads, as nearly parallel as possible, and converging at
points hereafter to be indicated in orders. the cavalry,
brigadier-general kilpatrick commanding, will receive special
orders from the commander-in-chief.
. there will be no general train of supplies, but each corps will
have its ammunition-train and provision-train, distributed
habitually as follows: behind each regiment should follow one wagon
and one ambulance; behind each brigade should follow a due
proportion of ammunition-wagons, provision-wagons, and ambulances.
in case of danger, each corps commander should change this order of
march, by having his advance and rear brigades unencumbered by
wheels. the separate columns will start habitually at  a.m., and
make about fifteen miles per day, unless otherwise fixed in
orders.
. the army will forage liberally on the country during the march.
to this end, each brigade commander will organize a good and
sufficient foraging party, under the command of one or more
discreet officers, who will gather, near the route traveled, corn
or forage of any kind, meat of any kind, vegetables, corn-meal, or
whatever is needed by the command, aiming at all times to keep in
the wagons at least ten days' provisions for his command, and three
days' forage. soldiers must not enter the dwellings of the
inhabitants, or commit any trespass; but, during a halt or camp,
they may be permitted to gather turnips, potatoes, and other
vegetables, and to drive in stock in sight of their camp. to
regular foraging-parties must be intrusted the gathering of
provisions and forage, at any distance from the road
traveled.
. to corps commanders alone is intrusted the power to destroy
mills, houses, cotton-gins, etc.; and for them this general
principle is laid down:
in districts and neighborhoods where the army is unmolested, no
destruction of each property should be permitted; but should
guerrillas or bushwhackers molest our march, or should the
inhabitants burn bridges, obstruct roads, or otherwise manifest
local hostility, then army commanders should order and enforce a
devastation more or less relentless, according to the measure of
such hostility.
. as for horses, mules, wagons, etc., belonging to the
inhabitants, the cavalry and artillery may appropriate freely and
without limit; discriminating, however, between the rich, who are
usually hostile, and the poor and industrious, usually neutral or
friendly. foraging-parties may also take mules or horses, to
replace the jaded animals of their trains, or to serve as
pack-mules for the regiments or brigades. in all foraging, of
whatever kind, the parties engaged will refrain from abusive or
threatening language, and may, where the officer in command thinks
proper, give written certificates of the facts, but no receipts;
and they will endeavor to leave with each family a reasonable
portion for their maintenance,
. negroes who are able-bodied and can be of service to the several
columns may be taken along; but each army commander will bear in
mind that the question of supplies is a very important one, and
that his first duty is to see to those who bear arms.
. the organization, at once, of a good pioneer battalion for each
army corps, composed if possible of negroes, should be attended to.
this battalion should follow the advance-guard, repair roads and
double them if possible, so that the columns will not be delayed
after reaching bad places. also, army commanders should practise
the habit of giving the artillery and wagons the road, marching
their troops on one side, and instruct their troops to assist
wagons at steep hills or bad crossings of streams.
. captain o. m. poe, chief-engineer, will assign to each wing of
the army a pontoon-train, fully equipped and organized; and the
commanders thereof will see to their being properly protected at
all times.
by order of major-general w. t. sherman,
l. m. dayton, aide-de-camp.
the greatest possible attention had been given to the artillery
and wagon trains. the number of guns had been reduced to
sixty-five, or about one gun to each thousand men, and these were
generally in batteries of four guns each.
each gun, caisson, and forges was drawn by four teams of horses.
we had in all about twenty-five hundred wagons, with teams of six
mules to each, and six hundred ambulances, with two horses to each.
the loads were made comparatively light, about twenty-five hundred
pounds net; each wagon carrying in addition the forage needed by
its own team: each soldier carried on his person forty rounds of
ammunition, and in the wagons were enough cartridges to make up
about two hundred rounds per man, and in like manner two hundred
rounds of assorted ammunition were carried for each gun.
the wagon-trains were divided equally between the four corps, so
that each had about eight hundred wagons, and these usually on the
march occupied five miles or more of road. each corps commander
managed his own train; and habitually the artillery and wagons had
the road, while the men, with the exception of the advance and rear
guards, pursued paths improvised by the aide of the wagons, unless
they were forced to use a bridge or causeway in common.
i reached atlanta during the afternoon of the th, and found
that all preparations had been made-colonel beckwith, chief
commissary, reporting one million two hundred thousand rations in
possession of the troops, which was about twenty days' supply, and
he had on hand a good supply of beef-cattle to be driven along on
the hoof. of forage, the supply was limited, being of oats and corn
enough for five days, but i knew that within that time we would
reach a country well stocked with corn, which had been gathered and
stored in cribs, seemingly for our use, by governor brown's
militia.
colonel poe, united states engineers, of my staff, had been busy
in his special task of destruction. he had a large force at work,
had leveled the great depot, round house, and the machine-shops of
the georgia railroad, and had applied fire to the wreck. one of
these machine-shops had been used by the rebels as an arsenal, and
in it were stored piles of shot and shell, some of which proved to
be loaded, and that night was made hideous by the bursting of
shells, whose fragments came uncomfortably, near judge lyon's
house, in which i was quartered. the fire also reached the block of
stores near the depot, and the heart of the city was in flames all
night, but the fire did not reach the parts of atlanta where the
court-house was, or the great mass of dwelling houses.
the march from atlanta began on the morning of november th,
the right wing and cavalry following the railroad southeast toward
jonesboro', and general slocum with the twentieth corps leading off
to the east by decatur and stone mountain, toward madison. these
were divergent lines, designed to threaten both mason and augusta
at the same time, so as to prevent a concentration at our intended
destination, or "objective," milledgeville, the capital of georgia,
distant southeast about one hundred miles. the time allowed each
column for reaching milledgeville was seven days. i remained in
atlanta during the th with the fourteenth corps, and the
rear-guard of the right wing, to complete the loading of the
trains, and the destruction of the buildings of atlanta which could
be converted to hostile uses, and on the morning of the th
started with my personal staff, a company of alabama cavalry,
commanded by lieutenant snelling, and an infantry company,
commanded by lieutenant mccrory, which guarded our small train of
wagons.
my staff was then composed of major l. m. dayton, aide-de-camp
and acting adjutant-general, major j. c. mccoy, and major j. c.
audenried, aides. major ward nichols had joined some weeks before
at gaylesville, alabama, and was attached as an acting
aide-de-camp. also major henry hitchcock had joined at the same
time as judge-advocate. colonel charles ewing was
inspector-general, and surgeon john moore medical director. these
constituted our mess. we had no tents, only the flies, with which
we nightly made bivouacs with the assistance of the abundant
pine-boughs, which made excellent shelter, as well as beds.
colonel l. c. easton was chief-quartermaster; colonel amos
beckwith, chief-commissary; colonel o. m. poe, chief-engineer; and
colonel t. g. baylor, chief of ordnance. these invariably rode with
us during the day, but they had a separate camp and mess at
night.
general william f. barry had been chief of artillery in the
previous campaign, but at kingston his face was so swollen with
erysipelas that he was reluctantly compelled to leave us for the
rear; and he could not, on recovering, rejoin us till we had
reached savannah.
about  a.m. of november th we rode out of atlanta by the
decatur road, filled by the marching troops and wagons of the
fourteenth corps; and reaching the hill, just outside of the old
rebel works, we naturally paused to look back upon the scenes of
our past battles. we stood upon the very ground whereon was fought
the bloody battle of july d, and could see the copse of wood
where mcpherson fell. behind us lay atlanta, smouldering and in
ruins, the black smoke rising high in air, and hanging like a pall
over the ruined city. away off in the distance, on the mcdonough
road, was the rear of howard's column, the gun-barrels glistening
in the sun, the white-topped wagons stretching away to the south;
and right before us the fourteenth corps, marching steadily and
rapidly, with a cheery look and swinging pace, that made light of
the thousand miles that lay between us and richmond. some band, by
accident, struck up the anthem of "john brown's soul goes marching
on;" the men caught up the strain, and never before or since have i
heard the chorus of "glory, glory, hallelujah!" done with more
spirit, or in better harmony of time and place.
then we turned our horses' heads to the east; atlanta was soon
lost behind the screen of trees, and became a thing of the past.
around it clings many a thought of desperate battle, of hope and
fear, that now seem like the memory of a dream; and i have never
seen the place since. the day was extremely beautiful, clear
sunlight, with bracing air, and an unusual feeling of exhilaration
seemed to pervade all minds--a feeling of something to come, vague
and undefined, still full of venture and intense interest. even the
common soldiers caught the inspiration, and many a group called out
to me as i worked my way past them, "uncle billy, i guess grant is
waiting for us at richmond!" indeed, the general sentiment was that
we were marching for richmond, and that there we should end the
war, but how and when they seemed to care not; nor did they measure
the distance, or count the cost in life, or bother their brains
about the great rivers to be crossed, and the food required for man
and beast, that had to be gathered by the way. there was a
"devil-may-care" feeling pervading officers and men, that made me
feel the full load of responsibility, for success would be accepted
as a matter of course, whereas, should we fail, this "march" would
be adjudged the wild adventure of a crazy fool. i had no purpose to
march direct for richmond by way of augusta and charlotte, but
always designed to reach the sea-coast first at savannah or port
royal, south carolina, and even kept in mind the alternative of
pensacola.
the first night out we camped by the road-side near lithonia.
stone mountain, a mass of granite, was in plain view, cut out in
clear outline against the blue sky; the whole horizon was lurid
with the bonfires of rail-ties, and groups of men all night were
carrying the heated rails to the nearest trees, and bending them
around the trunks. colonel poe had provided tools for ripping up
the rails and twisting them when hot; but the best and easiest way
is the one i have described, of heating the middle of the
iron-rails on bonfires made of the cross-ties, and then winding
them around a telegraph-pole or the trunk of some convenient
sapling. i attached much importance to this destruction of the
railroad, gave it my own personal attention, and made reiterated
orders to others on the subject.
the next day we passed through the handsome town of covington,
the soldiers closing up their ranks, the color-bearers unfurling
their flags, and the bands striking up patriotic airs. the white
people came out of their houses to behold the sight, spite of their
deep hatred of the invaders, and the negroes were simply frantic
with joy. whenever they heard my name, they clustered about my
horse, shouted and prayed in their peculiar style, which had a
natural eloquence that would have moved a stone. i have witnessed
hundreds, if not thousands, of such scenes; and can now see a poor
girl, in the very ecstasy of the methodist "shout," hugging the
banner of one of the regiments, and jumping up to the "feet of
jesus."
i remember, when riding around by a by-street in covington, to
avoid the crowd that followed the marching column, that some one
brought me an invitation to dine with a sister of sam. anderson,
who was a cadet at west point with me; but the messenger reached me
after we had passed the main part of the town. i asked to be
excused, and rode on to a place designated for camp, at the
crossing of the ulcofauhachee river, about four miles to the east
of the town. here we made our bivouac, and i walked up to a
plantation-house close by, where were assembled many negroes, among
them an old, gray-haired man, of as fine a head as i ever saw. i
asked him if he understood about the war and its progress. he said
he did; that he had been looking for the "angel of the lord" ever
since he was knee-high, and, though we professed to be fighting for
the union, he supposed that slavery was the cause, and that our
success was to be his freedom. i asked him if all the negro slaves
comprehended this fact, and he said they surely did. i then
explained to him that we wanted the slaves to remain where they
were, and not to load us down with useless mouths, which would eat
up the food needed for our fighting men; that our success was their
assured freedom; that we could receive a few of their young, hearty
men as pioneers; but that, if they followed us in swarms of old and
young, feeble and helpless, it would simply load us down and
cripple us in our great task. i think major henry hitchcock was
with me on that occasion, and made a note of the conversation, and
i believe that old man spread this message to the slaves, which was
carried from mouth to mouth, to the very end of our journey, and
that it in part saved us from the great danger we incurred of
swelling our numbers so that famine would have attended our
progress. it was at this very plantation that a soldier passed me
with a ham on his musket, a jug of sorghum-molasses under his arm,
and a big piece of honey in his hand, from which he was eating,
and, catching my eye, he remarked sotto voce and carelessly to a
comrade, "forage liberally on the country," quoting from my general
orders. on this occasion, as on many others that fell under my
personal observation, i reproved the man, explained that foraging
must be limited to the regular parties properly detailed, and that
all provisions thus obtained must be delivered to the regular
commissaries, to be fairly distributed to the men who kept their
ranks.
from covington the fourteenth corps (davis's), with which i was
traveling, turned to the right for milledgeville, via shady dale.
general slocum was ahead at madison, with the twentieth corps,
having torn up the railroad as far as that place, and thence had
sent geary's division on to the oconee, to burn the bridges across
that stream, when this corps turned south by eatonton, for
milledgeville, the common "objective" for the first stage of the
"march." we found abundance of corn, molasses, meal, bacon, and
sweet-potatoes. we also took a good many cows and oxen, and a large
number of mules. in all these the country was quite rich, never
before having been visited by a hostile army; the recent crop had
been excellent, had been just gathered and laid by for the winter.
as a rule, we destroyed none, but kept our wagons full, and fed our
teams bountifully.
the skill and success of the men in collecting forage was one of
the features of this march. each brigade commander had authority to
detail a company of foragers, usually about fifty men, with one or
two commissioned officers selected for their boldness and
enterprise. this party would be dispatched before daylight with a
knowledge of the intended day's march and camp; would proceed on
foot five or six miles from the route traveled by their brigade,
and then visit every plantation and farm within range. they would
usually procure a wagon or family carriage, load it with bacon,
corn-meal, turkeys, chickens, ducks, and every thing that could be
used as food or forage, and would then regain the main road,
usually in advance of their train. when this came up, they would
deliver to the brigade commissary the supplies thus gathered by the
way. often would i pass these foraging-parties at the roadside,
waiting for their wagons to come up, and was amused at their
strange collections--mules, horses, even cattle, packed with old
saddles and loaded with hams, bacon, bags of cornmeal, and poultry
of every character and description. although this foraging was
attended with great danger and hard work, there seemed to be a
charm about it that attracted the soldiers, and it was a privilege
to be detailed on such a party. daily they returned mounted on all
sorts of beasts, which were at once taken from them and
appropriated to the general use; but the next day they would start
out again on foot, only to repeat the experience of the day before.
no doubt, many acts of pillage, robbery, and violence, were
committed by these parties of foragers, usually called "bummers;"
for i have since heard of jewelry taken from women, and the plunder
of articles that never reached the commissary; but these acts were
exceptional and incidental. i never heard of any cases of murder or
rape; and no army could have carried along sufficient food and
forage for a march of three hundred miles; so that foraging in some
shape was necessary. the country was sparsely settled, with no
magistrates or civil authorities who could respond to requisitions,
as is done in all the wars of europe; so that this system of
foraging was simply indispensable to our success. by it our men
were well supplied with all the essentials of life and health,
while the wagons retained enough in case of unexpected delay, and
our animals were well fed. indeed, when we reached savannah, the
trains were pronounced by experts to be the finest in flesh and
appearance ever seen with any army.
habitually each corps followed some main road, and the foragers,
being kept out on the exposed flank, served all the military uses
of flankers. the main columns gathered, by the roads traveled, much
forage and food, chiefly meat, corn, and sweet-potatoes, and it was
the duty of each division and brigade quartermaster to fill his
wagons as fast as the contents were issued to the troops. the
wagon-trains had the right to the road always, but each wagon was
required to keep closed up, so as to leave no gaps in the column.
if for any purpose any wagon or group of wagons dropped out of
place, they had to wait for the rear. and this was always dreaded,
for each brigade commander wanted his train up at camp as soon
after reaching it with his men as possible.
i have seen much skill and industry displayed by these
quarter-masters on the march, in trying to load their wagons with
corn and fodder by the way without losing their place in column.
they would, while marching, shift the loads of wagons, so as to
have six or ten of them empty. then, riding well ahead, they would
secure possession of certain stacks of fodder near the road, or
cribs of corn, leave some men in charge, then open fences and a
road back for a couple of miles, return to their trains, divert the
empty wagons out of column, and conduct them rapidly to their
forage, load up and regain their place in column without losing
distance. on one occasion i remember to have seen ten or a dozen
wagons thus loaded with corn from two or three full cribs, almost
without halting. these cribs were built of logs, and roofed. the
train-guard, by a lever, had raised the whole side of the crib a
foot or two; the wagons drove close alongside, and the men in the
cribs, lying on their backs, kicked out a wagon-load of corn in the
time i have taken to describe it.
in a well-ordered and well-disciplined army, these things might
be deemed irregular, but i am convinced that the ingenuity of these
younger officers accomplished many things far better than i could
have ordered, and the marches were thus made, and the distances
were accomplished, in the most admirable way. habitually we started
from camp at the earliest break of dawn, and usually reached camp
soon after noon. the marches varied from ten to fifteen miles a
day, though sometimes on extreme flanks it was necessary to make as
much as twenty, but the rate of travel was regulated by the wagons;
and, considering the nature of the roads, fifteen miles per day was
deemed the limit.
the pontoon-trains were in like manner distributed in about
equal proportions to the four corps, giving each a section of about
nine hundred feet. the pontoons were of the skeleton pattern, with
cotton-canvas covers, each boat, with its proportion of balks and
cheeses, constituting a load for one wagon. by uniting two such
sections together, we could make a bridge of eighteen hundred feet,
enough for any river we had to traverse; but habitually the leading
brigade would, out of the abundant timber, improvise a bridge
before the pontoon-train could come up, unless in the cases of
rivers of considerable magnitude, such as the ocmulgee, oconee,
ogeechee, savannah, etc.
on the th of november i was still with the fourteenth corps,
near eatonton factory, waiting to hear of the twentieth corps; and
on the st we camped near the house of a man named mann; the next
day, about  p.m., general davis had halted his head of column on a
wooded ridge, overlooking an extensive slope of cultivated country,
about ten miles short of milledgeville, and was deploying his
troops for camp when i got up. there was a high, raw wind blowing,
and i asked him why he had chosen so cold and bleak a position. he
explained that he had accomplished his full distance for the day,
and had there an abundance of wood and water. he explained further
that his advance-guard was a mile or so ahead; so i rode on, asking
him to let his rear division, as it came up, move some distance
ahead into the depression or valley beyond. riding on some distance
to the border of a plantation, i turned out of the main road into a
cluster of wild-plum bushes, that broke the force of the cold
november wind, dismounted, and instructed the staff to pick out the
place for our camp.
the afternoon was unusually raw and cold. my orderly was at hand
with his invariable saddle-bags, which contained a change of
under-clothing, my maps, a flask of whiskey, and bunch of cigars.
taking a drink and lighting a cigar, i walked to a row of
negro-huts close by, entered one and found a soldier or two warming
themselves by a wood-fire. i took their place by the fire,
intending to wait there till our wagons had got up, and a camp made
for the night. i was talking to the old negro woman, when some one
came and explained to me that, if i would come farther down the
road, i could find a better place. so i started on foot, and found
on the main road a good double-hewed-log house, in one room of
which colonel poe, dr. moore, and others, had started a fire. i
sent back orders to the "plum-bushes" to bring our horses and
saddles up to this house, and an orderly to conduct our headquarter
wagons to the same place. in looking around the room, i saw a small
box, like a candle-box, marked "howell cobb," and, on inquiring of
a negro, found that we were at the plantation of general howell
cobb, of georgia, one of the leading rebels of the south, then a
general in the southern army, and who had been secretary of the
united states treasury in mr. buchanan's time. of course, we
confiscated his property, and found it rich in corn, beans,
pea-nuts, and sorghum-molasses. extensive fields were all round the
house; i sent word back to general david to explain whose
plantation it was, and instructed him to spare nothing. that night
huge bonfires consumed the fence-rails, kept our soldiers warm, and
the teamsters and men, as well as the slaves, carried off an
immense quantity of corn and provisions of all sorts.
in due season the headquarter wagons came up, and we got supper.
after supper i sat on a chair astride, with my back to a good fire,
musing, and became conscious that an old negro, with a
tallow-candle in his hand, was scanning my face closely. i
inquired, "what do you want, old man!" he answered, "dey say you is
massa sherman." i answered that such was the case, and inquired
what he wanted. he only wanted to look at me, and kept muttering,
"dis nigger can't sleep dis night." i asked him why he trembled so,
and he said that he wanted to be sure that we were in fact
"yankees," for on a former occasion some rebel cavalry had put on
light-blue overcoats, personating yankee troops, and many of the
negroes were deceived thereby, himself among the number had shown
them sympathy, and had in consequence been unmercifully beaten
therefor. this time he wanted to be certain before committing
himself; so i told him to go out on the porch, from which he could
see the whole horizon lit up with camp-fires, and he could then
judge whether he had ever seen any thing like it before. the old
man became convinced that the "yankees" had come at last, about
whom he had been dreaming all his life; and some of the staff
officers gave him a strong drink of whiskey, which set his tongue
going. lieutenant spelling, who commanded my escort, was a
georgian, and recognized in this old negro a favorite slave of his
uncle, who resided about six miles off; but the old slave did not
at first recognize his young master in our uniform. one of my
staff-officers asked him what had become of his young master,
george. he did not know, only that he had gone off to the war, and
he supposed him killed, as a matter of course. his attention was
then drawn to spelling's face, when he fell on his knees and
thanked god that he had found his young master alive and along with
the yankees. spelling inquired all about his uncle and the family,
asked my permission to go and pay his uncle a visit, which i
granted, of course, and the next morning he described to me his
visit. the uncle was not cordial, by any means, to find his nephew
in the ranks of the host that was desolating the land, and spelling
came back, having exchanged his tired horse for a fresher one out
of his uncle's stables, explaining that surely some of the
"bummers" would have got the horse had he not.
the next morning, november d, we rode into milledgeville, the
capital of the state, whither the twentieth corps had preceded us;
and during that day the left wing was all united, in and around
milledgeville. from the inhabitants we learned that some of
kilpatrick's cavalry had preceded us by a couple of days, and that
all of the right wing was at and near gordon, twelve miles off,
viz., the place where the branch railroad came to milledgeville
from the mason & savannah road. the first stage of the journey
was, therefore, complete, and absolutely successful.
general howard soon reported by letter the operations of his
right wing, which, on leaving atlanta, had substantially followed
the two roads toward mason, by jonesboro' and mcdonough, and
reached the ocmulgee at planters' factory, which they crossed, by
the aid of the pontoon-train, during the th and th of november.
thence, with the seventeenth corps (general blair's) he (general
howard) had marched via monticello toward gordon, having dispatched
kilpatrick's cavalry, supported by the fifteenth corps
(osterhaus's), to feign on mason. kilpatrick met the enemy's
cavalry about four miles out of mason, and drove them rapidly back
into the bridge-defenses held by infantry. kilpatrick charged
these, got inside the parapet, but could not hold it, and retired
to his infantry supports, near griswold station. the fifteenth
corps tore up the railroad-track eastward from griswold, leaving
charles r. wood's division behind as a rear-guard-one brigade of
which was intrenched across the road, with some of kilpatrick's
cavalry on the flanks. on the d of november general g. w. smith,
with a division of troops, came out of mason, attacked this brigade
(walcutt's) in position, and was handsomely repulsed and driven
back into mason. this brigade was in part armed with spencer
repeating-rifles, and its fire was so rapid that general smith
insists to this day that he encountered a whole division; but he is
mistaken; he was beaten by one brigade (walcutt's), and made no
further effort to molest our operations from that direction.
general walcutt was wounded in the leg, and had to ride the rest of
the distance to savannah in a carriage.
therefore, by the d, i was in milledgeville with the left
wing, and was in full communication with the right wing at gordon.
the people of milledgeville remained at home, except the governor
(brown), the state officers, and legislature, who had ignominiously
fled, in the utmost disorder and confusion; standing not on the
order of their going, but going at once--some by rail, some by
carriages, and many on foot. some of the citizens who remained
behind described this flight of the "brave and patriotic" governor
brown. he had occupied a public building known as the "governor's
mansion," and had hastily stripped it of carpets, curtains, and
furniture of all sorts, which were removed to a train of
freight-cars, which carried away these things--even the cabbages
and vegetables from his kitchen and cellar--leaving behind muskets,
ammunition, and the public archives. on arrival at milledgeville i
occupied the same public mansion, and was soon overwhelmed with
appeals for protection. general slocum had previously arrived with
the twentieth corps, had taken up his quarters at the milledgeville
hotel, established a good provost-guard, and excellent order was
maintained. the most frantic appeals had been made by the governor
and legislature for help from every quarter, and the people of the
state had been called out en masse to resist and destroy the
invaders of their homes and firesides. even the prisoners and
convicts of the penitentiary were released on condition of serving
as soldiers, and the cadets were taken from their military college
for the same purpose. these constituted a small battalion, under
general harry wayne, a former officer of the united states army,
and son of the then justice wayne of the supreme court. but these
hastily retreated east across the oconee river, leaving us a good
bridge, which we promptly secured.
at milledgeville we found newspapers from all the south, and
learned the consternation which had filled the southern mind at our
temerity; many charging that we were actually fleeing for our lives
and seeking safety at the hands of our fleet on the sea-coast. all
demanded that we should be assailed, "front, flank, and rear;" that
provisions should be destroyed in advance, so that we would starve;
that bridges should be burned, roads obstructed, and no mercy shown
us. judging from the tone of the southern press of that day, the
outside world must have supposed us ruined and lost. i give a few
of these appeals as samples, which to-day must sound strange to the
parties who made them:
corinth, mississippi, november , .
to the people of georgia:
arise for the defense of your native soil! rally around your
patriotic governor and gallant soldiers! obstruct and destroy all
the roads in sherman's front, flank, and rear, and his army will
soon starve in your midst. be confident. be resolute. trust in an
overruling providence, and success will soon crown your efforts. i
hasten to join you in the defense of your homes and
firesides.
richmond, november , .
to the people of georgia:
you have now the best opportunity ever yet presented to destroy the
enemy. put every thing at the disposal of our generals; remove all
provisions from the path of the, invader, and put all obstructions
in his path.
every citizen with his gun, and every negro with his spade and axe,
can do the work of a soldier. you can destroy the enemy by
retarding his march.
georgians, be firm! act promptly, and fear not!
b. h. hill, senator.
i most cordially approve the above.
james a. seddon, secretary of war.
richmond, november ,.
to the people of georgia:
we have had a special conference with president davis and the
secretary of war, and are able to assure you that they have done
and are still doing all that can be done to meet the emergency that
presses upon you. let every man fly to arms! remove your negroes,
horses, cattle, and provisions from sherman's army, and burn what
you cannot carry. burn all bridges, and block up the roads in his
route. assail the invader in front, flank, and rear, by night and
by day. let him have no rest.
members of congress.
of course, we were rather amused than alarmed at these threats,
and made light of the feeble opposition offered to our progress.
some of the officers (in the spirit of mischief) gathered together
in the vacant hall of representatives, elected a speaker, and
constituted themselves the legislature of the state of georgia! a
proposition was made to repeal the ordinance of secession, which
was well debated, and resulted in its repeal by a fair vote! i was
not present at these frolics, but heard of them at the time, and
enjoyed the joke.
meantime orders were made for the total destruction of the
arsenal and its contents, and of such public buildings as could be
easily converted to hostile uses. but little or no damage was done
to private property, and general slocum, with my approval, spared
several mills, and many thousands of bales of cotton, taking what
he knew to be worthless bonds, that the cotton should not be used
for the confederacy. meantime the right wing continued its movement
along the railroad toward savannah, tearing up the track and
destroying its iron. at the oconee was met a feeble resistance from
harry wayne's troops, but soon the pontoon-bridge was laid, and
that wing crossed over. gilpatrick's cavalry was brought into
milledgeville, and crossed the oconee by the bridge near the town;
and on the d i made the general orders for the next stage of the
march as far as millen. these were, substantially, for the right
wing to follow the savannah railroad, by roads on its south; the
left wing was to move to sandersville, by davisboro' and
louisville, while the cavalry was ordered by a circuit to the
north, and to march rapidly for millen, to rescue our prisoners of
war confined there. the distance was about a hundred miles.
general wheeler, with his division of rebel cavalry, had
succeeded in getting ahead of us between milledgeville and augusta,
and general p. j. hardee had been dispatched by general beauregard
from hood's army to oppose our progress directly in front. he had,
however, brought with him no troops, but relied on his influence
with the georgians (of whose state he was a native) to arouse the
people, and with them to annihilate sherman's army!
on the th we renewed the march, and i accompanied the
twentieth corps, which took the direct road to sandersville, which
we reached simultaneously with the fourteenth corps, on the th. a
brigade of rebel cavalry was deployed before the town, and was
driven in and through it by our skirmish-line. i myself saw the
rebel cavalry apply fire to stacks of fodder standing in the fields
at sandersville, and gave orders to burn some unoccupied dwellings
close by. on entering the town, i told certain citizens (who would
be sure to spread the report) that, if the enemy attempted to carry
out their threat to burn their food, corn, and fodder, in our
route, i would most undoubtedly execute to the letter the general
orders of devastation made at the outset of the campaign. with this
exception, and one or two minor cases near savannah, the people did
not destroy food, for they saw clearly that it would be ruin to
themselves.
at sandersville i halted the left wing until i heard that the
right wing was abreast of us on the railroad. during the evening a
negro was brought to me, who had that day been to the station
(tenille), about six miles south of the town. i inquired of him if
there were any yankees there, and he answered, "yes." he described
in his own way what he had seen.
"first, there come along some cavalry-men, and they burned the
depot; then come along some infantry-men, and they tore up the
track, and burned it;" and just before he left they had "sot fire
to the well."
the next morning, viz., the th, i rode down to the station,
and found general corse's division (of the fifteenth corps) engaged
in destroying the railroad, and saw the well which my negro
informant had seen "burnt." it was a square pit about twenty-five
feet deep, boarded up, with wooden steps leading to the bottom,
wherein was a fine copper pump, to lift the water to a tank above.
the soldiers had broken up the pump, heaved in the steps and
lining, and set fire to the mass of lumber in the bottom of the
well, which corroborated the negro's description.
from this point blair's corps, the seventeenth, took up the work
of destroying the railroad, the fifteenth corps following another
road leading eastward, farther to the south of the railroad. while
the left wing was marching toward louisville, north of the
railroad, general kilpatrick had, with his cavalry division, moved
rapidly toward waynesboro', on the branch railroad leading from
millen to augusta. he found wheeler's division of rebel cavalry
there, and had considerable skirmishing with it; but, learning that
our prisoners had been removed two days before from millen, he
returned to louisville on the th, where he found the left wing.
here he remained a couple of days to rest his horses, and,
receiving orders from me to engage wheeler and give him all the
fighting he wanted, he procured from general slocum the assistance
of the infantry division of general baird, and moved back for
waynesboro' on the d of december, the remainder of the left wing
continuing its march on toward millers. near waynesboro' wheeler
was again encountered, and driven through the town and beyond brier
creek, toward augusta, thus keeping up the delusion that the main
army was moving toward augusta. general kilpatrick's fighting and
movements about waynesboro' and brier creek were spirited, and
produced a good effect by relieving the infantry column and the
wagon-trains of all molestation during their march on millen.
having thus covered that flank, he turned south and followed the
movement of the fourteenth corps to buckhead church, north of
millen and near it.
on the d of december i entered millen with the seventeenth
corps (general frank p. blair), and there paused one day, to
communicate with all parts of the army. general howard was south of
the ogeechee river, with the fifteenth corps, opposite scarboro'.
general slocum was at buckhead church, four miles north of millen,
with the twentieth corps. the fourteenth (general davis) was at
lumpkin's station, on the augusta road, about ten miles north of
millen, and the cavalry division was within easy support of this
wing. thus the whole army was in good position and in good
condition. we had largely subsisted on the country; our wagons were
full of forage and provisions; but, as we approached the sea-coast,
the country became more sandy and barren, and food became more
scarce; still, with little or no loss, we had traveled two-thirds
of our distance, and i concluded to push on for savannah. at millen
i learned that general bragg was in augusta, and that general wade
hampton had been ordered there from richmond, to organize a large
cavalry force with which to resist our progress.
general hardee was ahead, between us and savannah, with mclaw's
division, and other irregular troops, that could not, i felt
assured, exceed ten thousand men. i caused the fine depot at millen
to be destroyed, and other damage done, and then resumed the march
directly on savannah, by the four main roads. the seventeenth corps
(general blair) followed substantially the railroad, and, along
with it, on the th of december, i reached ogeechee church, about
fifty miles from savannah, and found there fresh earthworks, which
had been thrown up by mclaw's division; but he must have seen that
both his flanks were being turned, and prudently retreated to
savannah without a fight. all the columns then pursued leisurely
their march toward savannah, corn and forage becoming more and more
scarce, but rice-fields beginning to occur along the savannah and
ogeechee rivers, which proved a good substitute, both as food and
forage. the weather was fine, the roads good, and every thing
seemed to favor us. never do i recall a more agreeable sensation
than the sight of our camps by night, lit up by the fires of
fragrant pine-knots. the trains were all in good order, and the men
seemed to march their fifteen miles a day as though it were
nothing. no enemy opposed us, and we could only occasionally hear
the faint reverberation of a gun to our left rear, where we knew
that general kilpatrick was skirmishing with wheeler's cavalry,
which persistently followed him. but the infantry columns had met
with no opposition whatsoever. mclaw's division was falling back
before us, and we occasionally picked up a few of his men as
prisoners, who insisted that we would meet with strong opposition
at savannah.
on the th, as i rode along, i found the column turned out of
the main road, marching through the fields. close by, in the corner
of a fence, was a group of men standing around a handsome young
officer, whose foot had been blown to pieces by a torpedo planted
in the road. he was waiting for a surgeon to amputate his leg, and
told me that he was riding along with the rest of his brigade-staff
of the seventeenth corps, when a torpedo trodden on by his horse
had exploded, killing the horse and literally blowing off all the
flesh from one of his legs. i saw the terrible wound, and made full
inquiry into the facts. there had been no resistance at that point,
nothing to give warning of danger, and the rebels had planted
eight-inch shells in the road, with friction-matches to explode
them by being trodden on. this was not war, but murder, and it made
me very angry. i immediately ordered a lot of rebel prisoners to be
brought from the provost-guard, armed with picks and spades, and
made them march in close order along the road, so as to explode
their own torpedoes, or to discover and dig them up. they begged
hard, but i reiterated the order, and could hardly help laughing at
their stepping so gingerly along the road, where it was supposed
sunken torpedoes might explode at each step, but they found no
other torpedoes till near fort mcallister. that night we reached
pooler's station, eight miles from savannah, and during the next
two days, december th and th, the several corps reached the
defenses of savannah--the fourteenth corps on the left, touching
the river; the twentieth corps next; then the seventeenth; and the
fifteenth on the extreme right; thus completely investing the city.
wishing to reconnoitre the place in person, i rode forward by the
louisville road, into a dense wood of oak, pine, and cypress, left
the horses, and walked down to the railroad-track, at a place where
there was a side-track, and a cut about four feet deep. from that
point the railroad was straight, leading into savannah, and about
eight hundred yards off were a rebel parapet and battery. i could
see the cannoneers preparing to fire, and cautioned the officers
near me to scatter, as we would likely attract a shot. very soon i
saw the white puff of smoke, and, watching close, caught sight of
the ball as it rose in its flight, and, finding it coming pretty
straight, i stepped a short distance to one side, but noticed a
negro very near me in the act of crossing the track at right
angles. some one called to him to look out; but, before the poor
fellow understood his danger, the ball (a thirty-two-pound round
shot) struck the ground, and rose in its first ricochet, caught the
negro under the right jaw, and literally carried away his head,
scattering blood and brains about. a soldier close by spread an
overcoat over the body, and we all concluded to get out of that
railroad-cut. meantime, general mower's division of the seventeenth
corps had crossed the canal to the right of the louisville road,
and had found the line of parapet continuous; so at savannah we had
again run up against the old familiar parapet, with its deep
ditches, canals, and bayous, full of water; and it looked as though
another siege was inevitable. i accordingly made a camp or bivouac
near the louisville road, about five miles from savannah, and
proceeded to invest the place closely, pushing forward
reconnoissances at every available point.
as soon as it was demonstrated that savannah was well fortified,
with a good garrison, commanded by general william j. hardee, a
competent soldier, i saw that the first step was to open
communication with our fleet, supposed to be waiting for us with
supplies and clothing in ossabaw sound.
general howard had, some nights previously, sent one of his best
scouts, captain duncan, with two men, in a canoe, to drift past
fort mcallister, and to convey to the fleet a knowledge of our
approach. general kilpatrick's cavalry had also been transferred to
the south bank of the ogeechee, with orders to open communication
with the fleet. leaving orders with general slocum to press the
siege, i instructed general howard to send a division with all his
engineers to grog's bridge, fourteen and a half miles southwest
from savannah, to rebuild it. on the evening of the th i rode
over myself, and spent the night at mr. king's house, where i found
general howard, with general hazen's division of the fifteenth
corps. his engineers were hard at work on the bridge, which they
finished that night, and at sunrise hazen's division passed over. i
gave general hazen, in person, his orders to march rapidly down the
right bank of the ogeechee, and without hesitation to assault and
carry fort mcallister by storm. i knew it to be strong in heavy
artillery, as against an approach from the sea, but believed it
open and weak to the rear. i explained to general hazen, fully,
that on his action depended the safety of the whole army, and the
success of the campaign. kilpatrick had already felt the fort, and
had gone farther down the coast to kilkenny bluff, or st.
catharine's sound, where, on the same day, he had communication
with a vessel belonging to the blockading fleet; but, at the time,
i was not aware of this fact, and trusted entirely to general hazen
and his division of infantry, the second of the fifteenth corps,
the same old division which i had commanded at shiloh and
vicksburg, in which i felt a special pride and confidence.
having seen general hazen fairly off, accompanied by general
howard, i rode with my staff down the left bank of the ogeechee,
ten miles to the rice-plantation of a mr. cheevea, where general
howard had established a signal-station to overlook the lower
river, and to watch for any vessel of the blockading squadron,
which the negroes reported to be expecting us, because they nightly
sent up rockets, and daily dispatched a steamboat up the ogeechee
as near to fort mcallister as it was safe.
on reaching the rice-mill at cheevea's, i found a guard and a
couple of twenty-pound parrott gone, of de gres's battery, which
fired an occasional shot toward fort mcallister, plainly seen over
the salt-marsh, about three miles distant. fort mcallister had the
rebel flag flying, and occasionally sent a heavy shot back across
the marsh to where we were, but otherwise every thing about the
place looked as peaceable and quiet as on the sabbath.
the signal-officer had built a platform on the ridge-pole of the
rice-mill. leaving our horses behind the stacks of rice-straw, we
all got on the roof of a shed attached to the mill, wherefrom i
could communicate with the signal-officer above, and at the same
time look out toward ossabaw sound, and across the ogeechee river
at fort mcallister. about  p.m. we observed signs of commotion in
the fort, and noticed one or two guns fired inland, and some
musket-skirmishing in the woods close by.
this betokened the approach of hazen's division, which had been
anxiously expected, and soon thereafter the signal-officer
discovered about three miles above the fort a signal-flag, with
which he conversed, and found it to belong to general hazen, who
was preparing to assault the fort, and wanted to know if i were
there. on being assured of this fact, and that i expected the fort
to be carried before night, i received by signal the assurance of
general hazen that he was making his preparations, and would soon
attempt the assault. the sun was rapidly declining, and i was
dreadfully impatient. at that very moment some one discovered a
faint cloud of smoke, and an object gliding, as it were, along the
horizon above the tops of the sedge toward the sea, which little by
little grew till it was pronounced to be the smoke-stack of a
steamer coming up the river. "it must be one of our squadron!" soon
the flag of the united states was plainly visible, and our
attention was divided between this approaching steamer and the
expected assault. when the sun was about an hour high, another
signal-message came from general hazen that he was all ready, and i
replied to go ahead, as a friendly steamer was approaching from
below. soon we made out a group of officers on the deck of this
vessel, signaling with a flag, "who are you!" the answer went back
promptly, "general sherman." then followed the question, "is fort
mcallister taken?" "not yet, but it will be in a minute!" almost at
that instant of time, we saw hazen's troops come out of the dark
fringe of woods that encompassed the fort, the lines dressed as on
parade, with colors flying, and moving forward with a quick, steady
pace. fort mcallister was then all alive, its big guns belching
forth dense clouds of smoke, which soon enveloped our assaulting
lines. one color went down, but was up in a moment. on the lines
advanced, faintly seen in the white, sulphurous smoke; there was a
pause, a cessation of fire; the smoke cleared away, and the
parapets were blue with our men, who fired their muskets in the
air, and shouted so that we actually heard them, or felt that we
did. fort mcallister was taken, and the good news was instantly
sent by the signal-officer to our navy friends on the approaching
gunboat, for a point of timber had shut out fort mcallister from
their view, and they had not seen the action at all, but must have
heard the cannonading.
during the progress of the assault, our little group on
cheeves's mill hardly breathed; but no sooner did we see our flags
on the parapet than i exclaimed, in the language of the poor negro
at cobb's plantation, "this nigger will have no sleep this
night!"
i was resolved to communicate with our fleet that night, which
happened to be a beautiful moonlight one. at the wharf belonging to
cheeves's mill was a small skiff, that had been used by our men in
fishing or in gathering oysters. i was there in a minute, called
for a volunteer crew, when several young officers, nichols and
merritt among the number; said they were good oarsmen, and
volunteered to pull the boat down to fort mcallister. general
howard asked to accompany me; so we took seats in the stern of the
boat, and our crew of officers pulled out with a will. the tide was
setting in strong, and they had a hard pull, for, though the
distance was but three miles in an air-line, the river was so
crooked that the actual distance was fully six miles. on the way
down we passed the wreck of a steamer which had been sunk some
years before, during a naval attack on fort mcallister.
night had fairly set in when we discovered a soldier on the
beach. i hailed him, and inquired if he knew where general hazen
was. he answered that the general was at the house of the overseer
of the plantation (mcallister's), and that he could guide me to it.
we accordingly landed, tied our boat to a driftlog, and followed
our guide through bushes to a frame-house, standing in a grove of
live-oaks, near a row of negro quarters.
general hazen was there with his staff, in the act of getting
supper; he invited us to join them, which we accepted promptly, for
we were really very hungry. of course, i congratulated hazen most
heartily on his brilliant success, and praised its execution very
highly, as it deserved, and he explained to me more in detail the
exact results. the fort was an inclosed work, and its land-front
was in the nature of a bastion and curtains, with good parapet,
ditch, fraise, and chevaux-de-frise, made out of the large branches
of live-oaks. luckily, the rebels had left the larger and unwieldy
trunks on the ground, which served as a good cover for the
skirmish-line, which crept behind these logs, and from them kept
the artillerists from loading and firing their guns accurately.
the assault had been made by three parties in line, one from
below, one from above the fort, and the third directly in rear,
along the capital. all were simultaneous, and had to pass a good
abatis and line of torpedoes, which actually killed more of the
assailants than the heavy guns of the fort, which generally
overshot the mark. hazen's entire loss was reported, killed and
wounded, ninety-two. each party reached the parapet about the same
time, and the garrison inside, of about two hundred and fifty men
(about fifty of them killed or wounded), were in his power. the
commanding officer, major anderson, was at that moment a prisoner,
and general hazen invited him in to take supper with us, which he
did.
up to this time general hazen did not know that a gunboat was in
the river below the fort; for it was shut off from sight by a point
of timber, and i was determined to board her that night, at
whatever risk or cost, as i wanted some news of what was going on
in the outer world. accordingly, after supper, we all walked down
to the fort, nearly a mile from the house where we had been,
entered fort mcallister, held by a regiment of hazen's troops, and
the sentinel cautioned us to be very careful, as the ground outside
the fort was full of torpedoes. indeed, while we were there, a
torpedo exploded, tearing to pieces a poor fellow who was hunting
for a dead comrade. inside the fort lay the dead as they had
fallen, and they could hardly be distinguished from their living
comrades, sleeping soundly side by side in the pale moonlight. in
the river, close by the fort, was a good yawl tied to a stake, but
the tide was high, and it required some time to get it in to the
bank; the commanding officer, whose name i cannot recall, manned
the boat with a good crew of his men, and, with general howard, i
entered, and pulled down-stream, regardless of the warnings all
about the torpedoes.
the night was unusually bright, and we expected to find the
gunboat within a mile or so; but, after pulling down the river
fully three miles, and not seeing the gunboat, i began to think she
had turned and gone back to the sound; but we kept on, following
the bends of the river, and about six miles below mcallister we saw
her light, and soon were hailed by the vessel at anchor. pulling
alongside, we announced ourselves, and were received with great
warmth and enthusiasm on deck by half a dozen naval officers, among
them captain williamson, united states navy. she proved to be the
dandelion, a tender of the regular gunboat flag, posted at the
mouth of the ogeechee. all sorts of questions were made and
answered, and we learned that captain duncan had safely reached the
squadron, had communicated the good news of our approach, and they
had been expecting us for some days. they explained that admiral
dahlgren commanded the south-atlantic squadron, which was then
engaged in blockading the coast from charleston south, and was on
his flag-ship, the harvest moon, lying in wassaw sound; that
general j. g. foster was in command of the department of the south,
with his headquarters at hilton head; and that several ships loaded
with stores for the army were lying in tybee roads and in port
royal sound. from these officers i also learned that general grant
was still besieging petersburg and richmond, and that matters and
things generally remained pretty much the same as when we had left
atlanta. all thoughts seemed to have been turned to us in georgia,
cut off from all communication with our friends; and the rebel
papers had reported us to be harassed, defeated, starving, and
fleeing for safety to the coast. i then asked for pen and paper,
and wrote several hasty notes to general foster, admiral dahlgren,
general grant, and the secretary of war, giving in general terms
the actual state of affairs, the fact of the capture of fort
mcallister, and of my desire that means should be taken to
establish a line of supply from the vessels in port up the ogeechee
to the rear of the army. as a sample, i give one of these notes,
addressed to the secretary of war, intended for publication to
relieve the anxiety of our friends at the north generally:
on board dandelion, ossabaw sound, december , --.
p.m.
to hon. e. m. stanton, secretary of war, washington, d. c.:
to-day, at  p. m., general hazen's division of the fifteenth corps
carried fort mcallister by assault, capturing its entire garrison
and stores. this opened to us ossabaw sound, and i pushed down to
this gunboat to communicate with the fleet. before opening
communication we had completely destroyed all the railroads leading
into savannah, and invested the city. the left of the army is on
the savannah river three miles above the city, and the right on the
ogeechee, at king's bridge. the army is in splendid order, and
equal to any thing. the weather has been fine, and supplies were
abundant. our march was most agreeable, and we were not at all
molested by guerrillas.
we reached savannah three days ago, but, owing to fort mcallister,
could not communicate; but, now that we have mcallister, we can go
ahead.
we have already captured two boats on the savannah river and
prevented their gunboats from coming down.
i estimate the population of savannah at twenty-five thousand, and
the garrison at fifteen thousand. general hardee commands.
we have not lost a wagon on the trip; but have gathered a large
supply of negroes, mules, horses, etc., and our teams are in far
better condition than when we started.
my first duty will be to clear the army of surplus negroes, mules,
and horses. we have utterly destroyed over two hundred miles of
rails, and consumed stores and provisions that were essential to
lee's and hood's armies.
the quick work made with mcallister, the opening of communication
with our fleet, and our consequent independence as to supplies,
dissipate all their boasted threats to head us off and starve the
army.
i regard savannah as already gained.
yours truly,
w. t. sherman, major-general.
by this time the night was well advanced, and the tide was
running ebb-strong; so i asked. captain williamson to tow us up as
near fort mcallister as he would venture for the torpedoes, of
which the navy-officers had a wholesome dread. the dandelion
steamed up some three or four miles, till the lights of fort
mcallister could be seen, when she anchored, and we pulled to the
fort in our own boat. general howard and i then walked up to the
mcallister house, where we found general hazen and his officers
asleep on the floor of one of the rooms. lying down on the floor, i
was soon fast asleep, but shortly became conscious that some one in
the room was inquiring for me among the sleepers. calling out, i
was told that an officer of general fosters staff had just arrived
from a steamboat anchored below mcallister; that the general was
extremely anxious to see me on important business, but that he was
lame from an old mexican-war wound, and could not possibly come to
me. i was extremely weary from the incessant labor of the day and
night before, but got up, and again walked down the sandy road to
mcallister, where i found a boat awaiting us, which carried us some
three miles down the river, to the steamer w. w. coit (i think), on
board of which we found general foster. he had just come from port
royal, expecting to find admiral dahlgren in ossabaw sound, and,
hearing of the capture of fort mcallister, he had come up to see
me. he described fully the condition of affairs with his own
command in south carolina. he had made several serious efforts to
effect a lodgment on the railroad which connects savannah with
charleston near pocotaligo, but had not succeeded in reaching the
railroad itself, though he had a full division of troops, strongly
intrenched, near broad river, within cannon-range of the railroad.
he explained, moreover, that there were at port royal abundant
supplies of bread and provisions, as well as of clothing, designed
for our use. we still had in our wagons and in camp abundance of
meat, but we needed bread, sugar, and coffee, and it was
all-important that a route of supply should at once be opened, for
which purpose the assistance of the navy were indispensable. we
accordingly steamed down the ogeechee river to ossabaw sound, in
hopes to meet admiral dahlgren, but he was not there, and we
continued on by the inland channel to warsaw sound, where we found
the harvest moon, and admiral dahlgren. i was not personally
acquainted with him at the time, but he was so extremely kind and
courteous that i was at once attracted to him. there was nothing in
his power, he said, which he would not do to assist us, to make our
campaign absolutely successful. he undertook at once to find
vessels of light draught to carry our supplies from port royal to
cheeves's mill, or to grog's bridge above, whence they could be
hauled by wagons to our several camps; he offered to return with me
to fort mcallister, to superintend the removal of the torpedoes,
and to relieve me of all the details of this most difficult work.
general foster then concluded to go on to port royal, to send back
to us six hundred thousand rations, and all the rifled guns of
heavy calibre, and ammunition on hand, with which i thought we
could reach the city of savannah, from the positions already
secured. admiral dahlgren then returned with me in the harvest moon
to fort mcallister. this consumed all of the th of december; and
by the th i had again reached cheeves's mill, where my horse
awaited me, and rode on to general howard's headquarters at
anderson's plantation, on the plank-road, about eight miles back of
savannah. i reached this place about noon, and immediately sent
orders to my own head-quarters, on the louisville road, to have
them brought over to the plank-road, as a place more central and
convenient; gave written notice to generals slocum and howard of
all the steps taken, and ordered them to get ready to receive the
siege-guns, to put them in position to bombard savannah, and to
prepare for the general assault. the country back of savannah is
very low, and intersected with innumerable saltwater creeks,
swamps, and rice-fields. fortunately the weather was good and the
roads were passable, but, should the winter rains set in, i knew
that we would be much embarrassed. therefore, heavy details of men
were at once put to work to prepare a wharf and depot at grog's
bridge, and the roads leading thereto were corduroyed in advance.
the ogeechee canal was also cleared out for use; and boats, such as
were common on the river plantations, were collected, in which to
float stores from our proposed base on the ogeechee to the points
most convenient to the several camps.
slocum's wing extended from the savannah river to the canal, and
howard's wing from the canal to the extreme right, along down the
little ogeechee. the enemy occupied not only the city itself, with
its long line of outer works, but the many forts which had been
built to guard the approaches from the sea-such as at beaulieu,
rosedew, white bluff, bonaventura, thunderbolt, cansten's bluff,
forts tatnall, boggs, etc., etc. i knew that general hardee could
not have a garrison strong enough for all these purposes, and i was
therefore anxious to break his lines before he could receive
reenforcements from virginia or augusta. general slocum had already
captured a couple of steamboats trying to pass down the savannah
river from augusta, and had established some of his men on argyle
and hutchinson islands above the city, and wanted to transfer a
whole corps to the south carolina bank; but, as the enemy had
iron-clad gunboats in the river, i did not deem it prudent, because
the same result could be better accomplished from general fosters
position at broad river.
fort mcallister was captured as described, late in the evening
of december th, and by the th many steamboats had passed up as
high as king's bridge; among them one which general grant had
dispatched with the mails for the army, which had accumulated since
our departure from atlanta, under charge of colonel a. h. markland.
these mails were most welcome to all the officers and soldiers of
the army, which had been cut off from friends and the world for two
months, and this prompt receipt of letters from home had an
excellent effect, making us feel that home was near. by this vessel
also came lieutenant dune, aide-de-camp, with the following letter
of december d, from general grant, and on the next day colonel
babcock, united states engineers, arrived with the letter of
december th, both of which are in general grant's own handwriting,
and are given entire:
city point, virginia, december , .
major-general w. t. sherman, commanding armies near savannah,
georgia.
general: the little information gleaned from the southern press
indicating no great obstacle to your progress, i have directed your
mails (which had been previously collected in baltimore by colonel
markland, special-agent of the post-office department) to be sent
as far as the blockading squadron off savannah, to be forwarded to
you as soon as heard from on the coast.
not liking to rejoice before the victory is assured, i abstain from
congratulating you and those under your command, until bottom has
been struck. i have never had a fear, however, for the
result.
since you left atlanta no very great progress has been made here.
the enemy has been closely watched, though, and prevented from
detaching against you. i think not one man has gone from here,
except some twelve or fifteen hundred dismounted cavalry. bragg has
gone from wilmington. i am trying to take advantage of his absence
to get possession of that place. owing to some preparations admiral
porter and general butler are making to blow up fort fisher (which,
while hoping for the best, i do not believe a particle in), there
is a delay in getting this expedition off. i hope they will be
ready to start by the th, and that bragg will not have started
back by that time.
in this letter i do not intend to give you any thing like
directions for future action, but will state a general idea i have,
and will get your views after you have established yourself on the
sea-coast. with your veteran army i hope to get control of the only
two through routes from east to west possessed by the enemy before
the fall of atlanta. the condition will be filled by holding
savannah and augusta, or by holding any other port to the east of
savannah and branchville. if wilmington falls, a force from there
can cooperate with you.
thomas has got back into the defenses of nashville, with hood close
upon him. decatur has been abandoned, and so have all the roads,
except the main one leading to chattanooga. part of this falling
back was undoubtedly necessary, and all of it may have been. it did
not look so, however, to me. in my opinion, thomas far outnumbers
hood in infantry. in cavalry hood has the advantage in morale and
numbers. i hope yet that hood will be badly crippled, if not
destroyed. the general news you will learn from the papers better
than i can give it.
after all becomes quiet, and roads become so bad up here that there
is likely to be a week or two when nothing can be done, i will run
down the coast to see you. if you desire it, i will ask mrs.
sherman to go with me. yours truly,
u. s. grant, lieutenant-general.
city point, virginia, december , .
major-general w. t. sherman, commanding military division of the
mississippi
general: on reflection since sending my letter by the hands of
lieutenant dunn, i have concluded that the most important operation
toward closing out the rebellion will be to close out lee and his
army.
you have now destroyed the roads of the south so that it will
probably take them three months without interruption to reestablish
a through line from east to west. in that time i think the job here
will be effectually completed.
my idea now is that you establish a base on the sea-coast, fortify
and leave in it all your artillery and cavalry, and enough infantry
to protect them, and at the same time so threaten the interior that
the militia of the south will have to be kept at home. with the
balance of your command come here by water with all dispatch.
select yourself the officer to leave in command, but you i want in
person. unless you see objections to this plan which i cannot see,
use every vessel going to you for purposes of transportation.
hood has thomas close in nashville. i have said all i can to force
him to attack, without giving the positive order until to-day.
to-day, however, i could stand it no longer, and gave the order
without any reserve. i think the battle will take place to-morrow.
the result will probably be known in new york before colonel
babcock (the bearer of this) will leave it. colonel babcock will
give you full information of all operations now in progress. very
respectfully your obedient servant,
u. s. grant, lieutenant-general.
the contents of these letters gave me great uneasiness, for i
had set my heart on the capture of savannah, which i believed to be
practicable, and to be near; for me to embark for virginia by sea
was so complete a change from what i had supposed would be the
course of events that i was very much concerned. i supposed, as a
matter of course, that a fleet of vessels would soon pour in, ready
to convey the army to virginia, and as general grant's orders
contemplated my leaving the cavalry, trains, and artillery, behind,
i judged fort mcallister to be the best place for the purpose, and
sent my chief-engineer, colonel poe, to that fort, to reconnoitre
the ground, and to prepare it so as to make a fortified camp large
enough to accommodate the vast herd of mules and horses that would
thus be left behind. and as some time might be required to collect
the necessary shipping, which i estimated at little less than a
hundred steamers and sailing-vessels, i determined to push
operations, in hopes to secure the city of savannah before the
necessary fleet could be available. all these ideas are given in my
answer to general grant's letters (dated december , )
herewith, which is a little more full than the one printed in the
report of the committee on the conduct of the war, because in that
copy i omitted the matter concerning general thomas, which now need
no longer be withheld:
in the field, near savannah, december , .
lieutenant-general u. s. grant, commander-in-chief, city point,
virginia.
general: i received, day before yesterday, at the hands of
lieutenant dunn, your letter of december d, and last night, at the
hands of colonel babcock, that of december th. i had previously
made you a hasty scrawl from the tugboat dandelion, in ogeechee
river, advising you that the army had reached the sea-coast,
destroying all the railroads across the state of georgia, investing
closely the city of savannah, and had made connection with the
fleet.
since writing that note, i have in person met and conferred with
general foster and admiral dahlgren, and made all the arrangements
which were deemed essential for reducing the city of savannah to
our possession. but, since the receipt of yours of the th, i have
initiated measures looking principally to coming to you with fifty
or sixty thousand infantry, and incidentally to capture savannah,
if time will allow.
at the time we carried fort mcallister by assault so handsomely,
with its twenty-two guns and entire garrison, i was hardly aware of
its importance; but, since passing down the river with general
foster and up with admiral dahlgren, i realize how admirably
adapted are ossabaw sound and ogeechee river to supply an army
operating against savannah. seagoing vessels can easily come to
king's bridge, a point on ogeechee river, fourteen and a half miles
due west of savannah, from which point we have roads leading to all
our camps. the country is low and sandy, and cut up with marshes,
which in wet weather will be very bad, but we have been so favored
with weather that they are all now comparatively good, and heavy
details are constantly employed in double-corduroying the marshes,
so that i have no fears even of bad weather. fortunately, also, by
liberal and judicious foraging, we reached the sea-coast abundantly
supplied with forage and provisions, needing nothing on arrival
except bread. of this we started from atlanta, with from eight to
twenty days' supply per corps and some of the troops only had one
day's issue of bread during the trip of thirty days; yet they did
not want, for sweet-potatoes were very abundant, as well as
corn-meal, and our soldiers took to them naturally. we started with
about five thousand head of cattle, and arrived with over ten
thousand, of course consuming mostly turkeys, chickens, sheep,
hogs, and the cattle of the country. as to our mules and horses, we
left atlanta with about twenty-five hundred wagons, many of which
were drawn by mules which had not recovered from the chattanooga
starvation, all of which were replaced, the poor mules shot, and
our transportation is now in superb condition. i have no doubt the
state of georgia has lost, by our operations, fifteen thousand
first-rate mules. as to horses, kilpatrick collected all his
remounts, and it looks to me, in riding along our columns, as
though every officer had three or four led horses, and each
regiment seems to be followed by at least fifty negroes and
foot-sore soldiers, riding on horses and mules. the custom was for
each brigade to send out daily a foraging-party of about fifty men,
on foot, who invariably returned mounted, with several wagons
loaded with poultry, potatoes, etc., and as the army is composed of
about forty brigades, you can estimate approximately the number of
horses collected. great numbers of these were shot by my order,
because of the disorganizing effect on our infantry of having too
many idlers mounted. general euston is now engaged in collecting
statistics on this subject, but i know the government will never
receive full accounts of our captures, although the result aimed at
was fully attained, viz., to deprive our enemy of them. all these
animals i will have sent to port royal, or collected behind fort
mcallister, to be used by general saxton in his farming operations,
or by the quartermaster's department, after they are systematically
accounted for. while general easton is collecting transportation
for my troops to james river, i will throw to port royal island all
our means of transportation i can, and collect the rest near fort
mcallister, covered by the ogeeehee river and intrenchments to be
erected, and for which captain poe, my chief-engineer, is now
reconnoitring the ground, but in the mean time will act as i have
begun, as though the city of savannah were my objective: namely,
the troops will continue to invest savannah closely, making attacks
and feints wherever we have fair ground to stand upon, and i will
place some thirty-pound parrotts, which i have got from general
foster, in position, near enough to reach the centre of the city,
and then will demand its surrender. if general hardee is alarmed,
or fears starvation, he may surrender; otherwise i will bombard the
city, but not risk the lives of our men by assaults across the
narrow causeways, by which alone i can now reach it.
if i had time, savannah, with all its dependent fortifications,
would surely fall into our possession, for we hold all its avenues
of supply.
the enemy has made two desperate efforts to get boats from above to
the city, in both of which he has been foiled-general slocum (whose
left flank rests on the river) capturing and burning the first
boat, and in the second instance driving back two gunboats and
capturing the steamer resolute, with seven naval officers and a
crew of twenty-five seamen. general slocum occupies argyle island
and the upper end of hutchinson inland, and has a brigade on the
south carolina shore opposite, and is very urgent to pass one of
his corps over to that shore. but, in view of the change of plan
made necessary by your order of the th, i will maintain things in
statu quo till i have got all my transportation to the rear and out
of the way, and until i have sea-transportation for the troops you
require at james river, which i will accompany and command in
person. of course, i will leave kilpatrick, with his cavalry (say
five thousand three hundred), and, it may be, a division of the
fifteenth corps; but, before determining on this, i must see
general foster, and may arrange to shift his force (now over above
the charleston railroad, at the head of broad river) to the
ogeeohee, where, in cooperation with kilpatrick's cavalry, he can
better threaten the state of georgia than from the direction of
port royal. besides, i would much prefer not to detach from my
regular corps any of its veteran divisions, and would even prefer
that other less valuable troops should be sent to reenforce foster
from some other quarter. my four corps, full of experience and full
of ardor, coming to you en masse, equal to sixty thousand fighting
men, will be a reenforcement that lee cannot disregard. indeed,
with my present command, i had expected, after reducing savannah,
instantly to march to columbia, south carolina; thence to raleigh,
and thence to report to you. but this would consume, it may be, six
weeks' time after the fall of savannah; whereas, by sea, i can
probably reach you with my men and arms before the middle of
january.
i myself am somewhat astonished at the attitude of things in
tennessee. i purposely delayed at kingston until general thomas
assured me that he was all ready, and my last dispatch from him of
the th of november was full of confidence, in which he promised
me that he would ruin hood if he dared to advance from florence,
urging me to go ahead, and give myself no concern about hood's army
in tennessee.
why he did not turn on him at franklin, after checking and
discomfiting him, surpasses my understanding. indeed, i do not
approve of his evacuating decatur, but think he should have assumed
the offensive against hood from pulaski, in the direction of
waynesburg. i know full well that general thomas is slow in mind
and in action; but he is judicious and brave and the troops feel
great confidence in him. i still hope he will out-manoeuvre and
destroy hood.
as to matters in the southeast, i think hardee, in savannah, has
good artillerists, some five or six thousand good infantry, and, it
may be, a mongrel mass of eight to ten thousand militia. in all our
marching through georgia, he has not forced us to use any thing but
a skirmish-line, though at several points he had erected
fortifications and tried to alarm us by bombastic threats. in
savannah he has taken refuge in a line constructed behind swamps
and overflowed rice-fields, extending from a point on the savannah
river about three miles above the city, around by a branch of the
little ogeechee, which stream is impassable from its salt-marshes
and boggy swamps, crossed only by narrow causeways or common
corduroy-roads.
there must be twenty-five thousand citizens, men, women, and
children, in savannah, that must also be fed, and how he is to feed
them beyond a few days i cannot imagine. i know that his
requisitions for corn on the interior counties were not filled, and
we are in possession of the rice-fields and mills, which could
alone be of service to him in this neighborhood. he can draw
nothing from south carolina, save from a small corner down in the
southeast, and that by a disused wagon-road. i could easily get
possession of this, but hardly deem it worth the risk of making a
detachment, which would be in danger by its isolation from the main
army. our whole army is in fine condition as to health, and the
weather is splendid. for that reason alone i feel a personal
dislike to turning northward. i will keep lieutenant dunn here
until i know the result of my demand for the surrender of savannah,
but, whether successful or not, shall not delay my execution of
your order of the th, which will depend alone upon the time it
will require to obtain transportation by sea.
i am, with respect, etc., your obedient servant,
w. t. sherman, major-general united states army.
having concluded all needful preparations, i rode from my
headquarters, on the plank-road, over to general slocum's
headquarters, on the macon road, and thence dispatched (by flag of
truce) into savannah, by the hands of colonel ewing,
inspector-general, a demand for the surrender of the place. the
following letters give the result. general hardee refused to
surrender, and i then resolved to make the attempt to break his
line of defense at several places, trusting that some one would
succeed.
near savannah, december , .
general william j. hardee, commanding confederate forces in
savannah.
general: you have doubtless observed, from your station at rosedew
that sea-going vessels now come through ossabaw sound and up the
ogeechee to the rear of my army, giving me abundant supplies of all
kinds, and more especially heavy ordnance necessary for the
reduction of savannah. i have already received guns that can cast
heavy and destructive shot as far as the heart of your city; also,
i have for some days held and controlled every avenue by which the
people and garrison of savannah can be supplied, and i am therefore
justified in demanding the surrender of the city of savannah, and
its dependent forts, and shall wait a reasonable time for your
answer, before opening with heavy ordnance. should you entertain
the proposition, i am prepared to grant liberal terms to the
inhabitants and garrison; but should i be forced to resort to
assault, or the slower and surer process of starvation, i shall
then feel justified in resorting to the harshest measures, and
shall make little effort to restrain my army--burning to avenge the
national wrong which they attach to savannah and other large cities
which have been so prominent in dragging our country into civil
war. i inclose you a copy of general hood's demand for the
surrender of the town of resaoa, to be used by you for what it is
worth. i have the honor to be your obedient servant,
w. t. sherman, major-general.
savannah, georgia, december , 
major-general w. t. sherman, commanding federal forces near
savannah, georgia.
general: i have to acknowledge the receipt of a communication from
you of this date, in which you demand "the surrender of savannah
and its dependent forts," on the ground that you "have received
guns that can cast heavy and destructive shot into the heart of the
city," and for the further reason that you "have, for some days,
held and controlled every avenue by which the people and garrison
can be supplied." you add that, should you be "forced to resort to
assault, or to the slower and surer process of starvation, you will
then feel justified in resorting to the harshest measures, and will
make little effort to restrain your army," etc., etc. the position
of your forces (a half-mile beyond the outer line for the
land-defense of savannah) is, at the nearest point, at least four
miles from the heart of the city. that and the interior line are
both intact.
your statement that you have, for some days, held and controlled
every avenue by which the people and garrison can be supplied, is
incorrect. i am in free and constant communication with my
department.
your demand for the surrender of savannah and its dependent forts
is refused.
with respect to the threats conveyed in the closing paragraphs of
your letter (of what may be expected in case your demand is not
complied with), i have to say that i have hitherto conducted the
military operations intrusted to my direction in strict accordance
with the rules of civilized warfare, and i should deeply regret the
adoption of any course by you that may force me to deviate from
them in future. i have the honor to be, very respectfully, your
obedient servant,
w. j. hardee, lieutenant-general.
in the field, near savannah, december ,   p.m.
lieutenant-general u. s. grant, city point, virginia.
general: i wrote you at length (by colonel babcock) on the th
instant. as i therein explained my purpose, yesterday i made a
demand on general hardee for the surrender of the city of savannah,
and to-day received his answer--refusing; copies of both letters
are herewith inclosed. you will notice that i claim that my lines
are within easy cannon-range of the heart of savannah; but general
hardee asserts that we are four and a half miles distant. but i
myself have been to the intersection of the charleston and georgia
central railroads, and the three-mile post is but a few yards
beyond, within the line of our pickets. the enemy has no pickets
outside of his fortified line (which is a full quarter of a mile
within the three-mile post), and i have the evidence of mr. r. r.
cuyler, president of the georgia central railroad (who was a
prisoner in our hands), that the mile-posts are measured from the
exchange, which is but two squares back from the river. by
to-morrow morning i will have six thirty-pound parrotts in
position, and general hardee will learn whether i am right or not.
from the left of our line, which is on the savannah river, the
spires can be plainly seen; but the country is so densely wooded
with pine and live-oak, and lies so flat, that we can see nothing
from any other portion of our lines. general slocum feels confident
that he can make a successful assault at one or two points in front
of general davis's (fourteenth) corps. all of general howard's
troops (the right wing) lie behind the little ogeechee, and i doubt
if it can be passed by troops in the face of an enemy. still, we
can make strong feints, and if i can get a sufficient number of
boats, i shall make a cooperative demonstration up vernon river or
wassaw sound. i should like very much indeed to take savannah
before coming to you; but, as i wrote to you before, i will do
nothing rash or hasty, and will embark for the james river as soon
as general easton (who is gone to port royal for that purpose)
reports to me that he has an approximate number of vessels for the
transportation of the contemplated force. i fear even this will
cost more delay than you anticipate, for already the movement of
our transports and the gunboats has required more time than i had
expected. we have had dense fogs; there are more mud-banks in the
ogeechee than were reported, and there are no pilots whatever.
admiral dahlgren promised to have the channel buoyed and staked,
but it is not done yet. we find only six feet of water up to king's
bridge at low tide, about ten feet up to the rice-mill, and sixteen
to fort mcallister. all these points may be used by us, and we have
a good, strong bridge across ogeechee at king's, by which our
wagons can go to fort mcallister, to which point i am sending all
wagons not absolutely necessary for daily use, the negroes,
prisoners of war, sick, etc., en route for port royal. in relation
to savannah, you will remark that general hardee refers to his
still being in communication with his department. this language he
thought would deceive me; but i am confirmed in the belief that the
route to which he refers (the union plank-road on the south
carolina shore) is inadequate to feed his army and the people of
savannah, and general foster assures me that he has his force on
that very road, near the head of broad river, so that cars no
longer run between charleston and savannah. we hold this end of the
charleston railroad, and have destroyed it from the three-mile post
back to the bridge (about twelve miles). in anticipation of leaving
this country, i am continuing the destruction of their railroads,
and at this moment have two divisions and the cavalry at work
breaking up the gulf railroad from the ogeechee to the altamaha; so
that, even if i do not take savannah, i will leave it in a bad way.
but i still hope that events will give me time to take savannah,
even if i have to assault with some loss. i am satisfied that,
unless we take it, the gunboats never will, for they can make no
impression upon the batteries which guard every approach from the
sea. i have a faint belief that, when colonel babcock reaches you,
you will delay operations long enough to enable me to succeed here.
with savannah in our possession, at some future time if not now, we
can punish south carolina as she deserves, and as thousands of the
people in georgia hoped we would do. i do sincerely believe that
the whole united states, north and south, would rejoice to have
this army turned loose on south carolina, to devastate that state
in the manner we have done in georgia, and it would have a direst
and immediate bearing on your campaign in virginia.
i have the honor to be your obedient servant,
w. t. sherman, major-general united states army.
as soon as the army had reached savannah, and had opened
communication with the fleet, i endeavored to ascertain what had
transpired in tennessee since our departure. we received our
letters and files of newspapers, which contained full accounts of
all the events there up to about the st of december. as before
described, general hood had three full corps of infantry--s. d.
lee's, a. p. stewart's, and cheatham's, at florence, alabama--with
forrest's corps of cavalry, numbering in the aggregate about
forty-five thousand men. general thomas was in nashville,
tennessee, quietly engaged in reorganizing his army out of the
somewhat broken forces at his disposal. he had posted his only two
regular corps, the fourth and twenty-third, under the general
command of major-general j. m. schofield, at pulaski, directly in
front of florence, with the three brigades of cavalry (hatch,
croxton, and capron), commanded by major-general wilson, watching
closely for hood's initiative.
this force aggregated about thirty thousand men, was therefore
inferior to the enemy; and general schofield was instructed, in
case the enemy made a general advance, to fall back slowly toward
nashville, fighting, till he should be reenforced by general thomas
in person. hood's movement was probably hurried by reason of my
advance into georgia; for on the th his infantry columns marched
from florence in the direction of waynesboro', turning, schofield's
position at pulaski. the latter at once sent his trains to the
rear, and on the st fell back to columbia, tennessee. general
hood followed up this movement, skirmished lightly with schofield
at columbia, began the passage of duck river, below the town, and
cheatham's corps reached the vicinity of spring hill, whither
general schofield had sent general stanley, with two of his
divisions, to cover the movement of his trains. during the night of
november th general schofield passed spring hill with his trains
and army, and took post at franklin, on the south aide of harpeth
river. general hood now attaches serious blame to general cheatham
for not attacking general schofield in flank while in motion at
spring hill, for he was bivouacked within eight hundred yards of
the road at the time of the passage of our army. general schofield
reached franklin on the morning of november th, and posted his
army in front of the town, where some rifle-intrenchments had been
constructed in advance. he had the two corps of stanley and cox
(fourth and twenty-third), with wilson's cavalry on his flanks, and
sent his trains behind the harpeth.
general hood closed upon him the same day, and assaulted his
position with vehemence, at one time breaking the line and wounding
general stanley seriously; but our men were veterans, cool and
determined, and fought magnificently. the rebel officers led their
men in person to the several persistent assaults, continuing the
battle far into the night, when they drew off, beaten and
discomfited.
their loss was very severe, especially in general officers;
among them generals cleburn and adams, division commanders. hood's
loss on that day was afterward ascertained to be (thomas's report):
buried on the field, seventeen hundred and fifty; left in hospital
at franklin, thirty-eight hundred; and seven hundred and two
prisoners captured and held: aggregate, six thousand two hundred
and fifty-two. general schofields lose, reported officially, was
one hundred and eighty-nine killed, one thousand and thirty-three
wounded, and eleven hundred and four prisoners or missing:
aggregate, twenty-three hundred and twenty-six. the next day
general schofield crossed the harpeth without trouble, and fell
back to the defenses of nashville.
meantime general thomas had organized the employees of the
quartermaster's department into a corps, commanded by the
chief-quartermaster, general j. z. donaldson, and placed them in
the fortifications of nashville, under the general direction of
major-general z. b. tower, now of the united states engineers. he
had also received the two veteran divisions of the sixteenth corps,
under general a. j. smith, long absent and long expected; and he
had drawn from chattanooga and decatur (alabama) the divisions of
steedman and of r. s. granger. these, with general schofields army
and about ten thousand good cavalry, under general j. h. wilson,
constituted a strong army, capable not only of defending nashville,
but of beating hood in the open field. yet thomas remained inside
of nashville, seemingly passive, until general hood had closed upon
him and had entrenched his position.
general thomas had furthermore held fast to the railroad leading
from nashville to chattanooga, leaving strong guards at its
principal points, as at murfreesboro', deckerd, stevenson,
bridgeport, whitesides, and chattanooga. at murfreesboro' the
division of rousseau was reenforced and strengthened up to about
eight thousand men.
at that time the weather was cold and sleety, the ground was
covered with ice and snow, and both parties for a time rested on
the defensive. those matters stood at nashville, while we were
closing down on savannah, in the early part of december, ; and
the country, as well as general grant, was alarmed at the seeming
passive conduct of general thomas; and general grant at one time
considered the situation so dangerous that he thought of going to
nashville in person, but general john a. logan, happening to be at
city point, was sent out to supersede general thomas; luckily for
the latter, he acted in time, gained a magnificent victory, and
thus escaped so terrible a fate.
on the th of december, at my camp by the side of the
plank-road, eight miles back of savannah, i received general
hardee's letter declining to surrender, when nothing remained but
to assault. the ground was difficult, and, as all former assaults
had proved so bloody, i concluded to make one more effort to
completely surround savannah on all aides, so as further to excite
hardee's fears, and, in case of success, to capture the whole of
his army. we had already completely invested the place on the
north, west, and south, but there remained to the enemy, on the
east, the use of the old dike or plank-road leading into south
carolina, and i knew that hardee would have a pontoon-bridge across
the river. on examining my maps, i thought that the division of
john p. hatch, belonging to general fosters command, might be moved
from its then position at broad river, by water, down to bluffton,
from which it could reach this plank-road, fortify and hold it--at
some risk, of course, because hardee could avail himself of his
central position to fall on this detachment with his whole army. i
did not want to make a mistake like "ball's bluff" at that period
of the war; so, taking one or two of my personal staff, i rode back
to grog's bridge, leaving with generals howard and slocum orders to
make all possible preparations, but not to attack, during my two or
three days' absence; and there i took a boat for wassaw sound,
whence admiral dahlgren conveyed me in his own boat (the harvest
moon) to hilton head, where i represented the matter to general
foster, and he promptly agreed to give his personal attention to
it. during the night of the th we started back, the wind blowing
strong, admiral dahlgren ordered the pilot of the harvest moon to
run into tybee, and to work his way through to wassaw sound and the
ogeechee river by the romney marshes. we were caught by a low tide
and stuck in the mud. after laboring some time, the admiral ordered
out his barge; in it we pulled through this intricate and shallow
channel, and toward evening of december st we discovered, coming
toward us, a tug, called the red legs, belonging to the
quarter-master's department, with a staff-officer on board, bearing
letters from colonel dayton to myself and the admiral, reporting
that the city of savannah had been found evacuated on the morning
of december st, and was then in our possession. general hardee
had crossed the savannah river by a pontoon-bridge, carrying off
his men and light artillery, blowing up his iron-clads and
navy-yard, but leaving for us all the heavy guns, stores, cotton,
railway-cars, steamboats, and an immense amount of public and
private property. admiral dahlgren concluded to go toward a vessel
(the sonoma) of his blockading fleet, which lay at anchor near
beaulieu, and i transferred to the red legs, and hastened up the
ogeechee river to grog's bridge, whence i rode to my camp that same
night. i there learned that, early on the morning of december st,
the skirmishers had detected the absence of the enemy, and had
occupied his lines simultaneously along their whole extent; but the
left flank (slocum), especially geary's division of the twentieth
corps, claimed to have been the first to reach the heart of the
city.
generals slocum and howard moved their headquarters at once into
the city, leaving the bulk of their troops in camps outside. on the
morning of december d i followed with my own headquarters, and
rode down bull street to the custom-house, from the roof of which
we had an extensive view over the city, the river, and the vast
extent of marsh and rice-fields on the south carolina side. the
navy-yard, and the wreck of the iron-clad ram savannah, were still
smouldering, but all else looked quiet enough. turning back, we
rode to the pulaski hotel, which i had known in years long gone,
and found it kept by a vermont man with a lame leg, who used to be
a clerk in the st. louis hotel, new orleans, and i inquired about
the capacity of his hotel for headquarters. he was very anxious to
have us for boarders, but i soon explained to him that we had a
full mess equipment along, and that we were not in the habit of
paying board; that one wing of the building would suffice for our
use, while i would allow him to keep an hotel for the accommodation
of officers and gentlemen in the remainder. i then dispatched an
officer to look around for a livery-stable that could accommodate
our horses, and, while waiting there, an english gentleman, mr.
charles green, came and said that he had a fine house completely
furnished, for which he had no use, and offered it as headquarters.
he explained, moreover, that general howard had informed him, the
day before, that i would want his house for headquarters. at first
i felt strongly disinclined to make use of any private dwelling,
lest complaints should arise of damage and lose of furniture, and
so expressed myself to mr. green; but, after riding about the city,
and finding his house so spacious, so convenient, with large yard
and stabling, i accepted his offer, and occupied that house during
our stay in savannah. he only reserved for himself the use of a
couple of rooms above the dining-room, and we had all else, and a
most excellent house it was in all respects.
i was disappointed that hardee had escaped with his army, but on
the whole we had reason to be content with the substantial fruits
of victory. the savannah river was found to be badly obstructed by
torpedoes, and by log piers stretched across the channel below the
city, which piers were filled with the cobble stones that formerly
paved the streets. admiral dahlgren was extremely active, visited
me repeatedly in the city, while his fleet still watched
charleston, and all the avenues, for the blockade-runners that
infested the coast, which were notoriously owned and managed by
englishmen, who used the island of new providence (nassau) as a
sort of entrepot. one of these small blockade-runners came into
savannah after we were in full possession, and the master did not
discover his mistake till he came ashore to visit the custom-house.
of coarse his vessel fell a prize to the navy. a heavy force was at
once set to work to remove the torpedoes and obstructions in the
main channel of the river, and, from that time forth, savannah
became the great depot of supply for the troops operating in that
quarter.
meantime, on the th and th of december, were fought, in
front of nashville, the great battles in which general thomas so
nobly fulfilled his promise to ruin hood, the details of which are
fully given in his own official reports, long-since published.
rumors of these great victories reached us at savannah by
piecemeal, but his official report came on the th of december,
with a letter from general grant, giving in general terms the
events up to the th, and i wrote at once through my chief of
staff, general webster, to general thomas, complimenting him in the
highest terms. his brilliant victory at nashville was necessary to
mine at savannah to make a complete whole, and this fact was
perfectly comprehended by mr. lincoln, who recognized it fully in
his personal letter of december th, hereinbefore quoted at
length, and which is also claimed at the time, in my special field
order no. , of january , , here given:
(special field order no. .)
in the field, near savannah, georgia, january , .
the general commanding announces to the troops composing the
military division of the mississippi that he has received from the
president of the united states, and from lieutenant-general grant,
letters conveying their high sense and appreciation of the campaign
just closed, resulting in the capture of savannah and the defeat of
hood's army in tennessee.
in order that all may understand the importance of events, it is
proper to revert to the situation of affairs in september last. we
held atlanta, a city of little value to us, but so important to the
enemy that mr. davis, the head of the rebellious faction in the
south, visited his army near palmetto, and commanded it to regain
the place and also to ruin and destroy us, by a series of measures
which he thought would be effectual. that army, by a rapid march,
gained our railroad near big shanty, and afterward about dalton. we
pursued it, but it moved so rapidly that we could not overtake it,
and general hood led his army successfully far over toward
mississippi, in hope to decoy us out of georgia. but we were not
thus to be led away by him, and preferred to lead and control
events ourselves. generals thomas and schofield, commanding the
departments to our rear, returned to their posts and prepared to
decoy general hood into their meshes, while we came on to complete
the original journey. we quietly and deliberately destroyed
atlanta, and all the railroads which the enemy had used to carry on
war against us, occupied his state capital, and then captured his
commercial capital, which had been so strongly fortified from the
sea as to defy approach from that quarter. almost at the moment of
our victorious entry into savannah came the welcome and expected
news that our comrades in tennessee had also fulfilled nobly and
well their part, had decoyed general hood to nashville and then
turned on him, defeating his army thoroughly, capturing all his
artillery, great numbers of prisoners, and were still pursuing the
fragments down in alabama. so complete success in military
operations, extending over half a continent, is an achievement that
entitles it to a place in the military history of the world. the
armies serving in georgia and tennessee, as well as the local
garrisons of decatur, bridgeport, chattanooga, and murfreesboro',
are alike entitled to the common honors, and each regiment may
inscribe on its colors, at pleasure, the word "savannah" or
"nashville." the general commanding embraces, in the same general
success, the operations of the cavalry under generals stoneman,
burbridge, and gillem, that penetrated into southwest virginia, and
paralyzed the efforts of the enemy to disturb the peace and safety
of east tennessee. instead of being put on the defensive, we have
at all points assumed the bold offensive, and have completely
thwarted the designs of the enemies of our country.
by order of major-general w. t. sherman,
l. m. dayton, aide-de-camp.
here terminated the "march to the sea," and i only add a few
letters, selected out of many, to illustrate the general feeling of
rejoicing throughout the country at the time. i only regarded the
march from atlanta to savannah as a "shift of base," as the
transfer of a strong army, which had no opponent, and had finished
its then work, from the interior to a point on the sea-coast, from
which it could achieve other important results. i considered this
march as a means to an end, and not as an essential act of war.
still, then, as now, the march to the sea was generally regarded as
something extraordinary, something anomalous, something out of the
usual order of events; whereas, in fact, i simply moved from
atlanta to savannah, as one step in the direction of richmond, a
movement that had to be met and defeated, or the war was
necessarily at an end.
were i to express my measure of the relative importance of the
march to the sea, and of that from savannah northward, i would
place the former at one, and the latter at ten, or the maximum.
i now close this long chapter by giving a tabular statement of
the losses during the march, and the number of prisoners captured.
the property captured consisted of horses and mules by the
thousand, and of quantities of subsistence stores that aggregate
very large, but may be measured with sufficient accuracy by
assuming that sixty-five thousand men obtained abundant food for
about forty days, and thirty-five thousand animals were fed for a
like period, so as to reach savannah in splendid flesh and
condition. i also add a few of the more important letters that
passed between generals grant, halleck, and myself, which
illustrate our opinions at that stage of the war:
killed
wounded
missing
captured
officers
men
officers
men
officers
men
officers
men
washington, december , 
major-general sherman (via hilton head).
general: lieutenant-general grant informs me that, in his last
dispatch sent to you, he suggested the transfer of your infantry to
richmond. he now wishes me to say that you will retain your entire
force, at least for the present, and, with such assistance as may
be given you by general foster and admiral dahlgren, operate from
such base as you may establish on the coast. general foster will
obey such instructions as may be given by you.
should you have captured savannah, it is thought that by
transferring the water-batteries to the land side that place may be
made a good depot and base of operations on augusta, branchville,
or charleston. if savannah should not be captured, or if captured
and not deemed suitable for this purpose, perhaps beaufort would
serve as a depot. as the rebels have probably removed their most
valuable property from augusta, perhaps branchville would be the
most important point at which to strike in order to sever all
connection between virginia and the southwestern railroad.
general grant's wishes, however, are, that this whole matter of
your future actions should be entirely left to your
discretion.
we can send you from here a number of complete batteries of
field-artillery, with or without horses, as you may desire; also,
as soon as general thomas can spare them, all the fragments,
convalescents, and furloughed men of your army. it is reported that
thomas defeated hood yesterday, near nashville, but we have no
particulars nor official reports, telegraphic communication being
interrupted by a heavy storm.
our last advises from you was general howard's note, announcing his
approach to savannah. yours truly,
h. w. halleck, major-general, chief-of-staff.
washington, december , .
major-general w. t. sherman, savannah (via hilton head).
my dear general: yours of the th, by major anderson, is just
received. i congratulate you on your splendid success, and shall
very soon expect to hear of the crowning work of your campaign--the
capture of savannah. your march will stand out prominently as the
great one of this great war. when savannah falls, then for another
wide swath through the centre of the confederacy. but i will not
anticipate. general grant is expected here this morning, and will
probably write you his own views.
i do not learn from your letter, or from major anderson, that you
are in want of any thing which we have not provided at hilton head.
thinking it probable that you might want more field-artillery, i
had prepared several batteries, but the great difficulty of
foraging horses on the sea-coast will prevent our sending any
unless you actually need them. the hay-crop this year is short, and
the quartermaster's department has great difficulty in procuring a
supply for our animals.
general thomas has defeated hood, near nashville, and it is hoped
that he will completely, crush his army. breckenridge, at last
accounts, was trying to form a junction near murfreesboro', but, as
thomas is between them, breckenridge must either retreat or be
defeated.
general rosecrans made very bad work of it in missouri, allowing
price with a small force to overrun the state and destroy millions
of property.
orders have been issued for all officers and detachments having
three months or more to serve, to rejoin your army via savannah.
those having less than three months to serve, will be retained by
general thomas.
should you capture charleston, i hope that by some accident the
place may be destroyed, and, if a little salt should be sown upon
its site, it may prevent the growth of future crops of
nullification and secession. yours truly,
h. w. halleck, major-general, chief-of-staff.
washington, december , .
to major-general w. t. sherman, commanding military division of the
mississippi.
my dear general: i have just received and read, i need not tell you
with how mush gratification, your letter to general halleck. i
congratulate you and the brave officers and men under your command
on the successful termination of your most brilliant campaign. i
never had a doubt of the result. when apprehensions for your safety
were expressed by the president, i assured him with the army you
had, and you in command of it, there was no danger but you would
strike bottom on salt-water some place; that i would not feel the
same security--in fact, would not have intrusted the expedition to
any other living commander.
it has been very hard work to get thomas to attack hood. i gave him
the most peremptory order, and had started to go there myself,
before he got off. he has done magnificently, however, since he
started. up to last night, five thousand prisoners and forty-nine
pieces of captured artillery, besides many wagons and innumerable
small-arms, had been received in nashville. this is exclusive of
the enemy's loss at franklin, which amounted to thirteen general
officers killed, wounded, and captured. the enemy probably lost
five thousand men at franklin, and ten thousand in the last three
days' operations. breckenridge is said to be making for
murfreesboro'.
i think he is in a most excellent place. stoneman has nearly wiped
out john morgan's old command, and five days ago entered bristol. i
did think the best thing to do was to bring the greater part of
your army here, and wipe out lee. the turn affairs now seem to be
taking has shaken me in that opinion. i doubt whether you may not
accomplish more toward that result where you are than if brought
here, especially as i am informed, since my arrival in the city,
that it would take about two months to get you here with all the
other calls there are for ocean transportation.
i want to get your views about what ought to be done, and what can
be done. if you capture the garrison of savannah, it certainly will
compel lee to detach from richmond, or give us nearly the whole
south. my own opinion is that lee is averse to going out of
virginia, and if the cause of the south is lost he wants richmond
to be the last place surrendered. if he has such views, it may be
well to indulge him until we get every thing else in our
hands.
congratulating you and the army again upon the splendid results of
your campaign, the like of which is not read of in past history, i
subscribe myself, more than ever, if possible, your friend,
u. s. grant, lieutenant-general.
city point, virginia, december , .
major-general w. t. sherman, savannah, georgia.
general: your very interesting letter of the d inst., brought by
major grey of general foster's staff; is fast at hand. as the major
starts back at once, i can do no more at present than simply
acknowledge its receipt. the capture of savannah, with all its
immense stores, must tell upon the people of the south. all well
here.
yours truly,
u. s. grant, lieutenant-general.
savannah, georgia, december , .
lieutenant-general u. s. grant, city point, virginia.
general: your letter of december th is just received. i feel very
much gratified at receiving the handsome commendation you pay my
army. i will, in general orders, convey to the officers and men the
substance of your note.
i am also pleased that you have modified your former orders, for i
feared that the transportation by sea would very much disturb the
unity and morale of my army, now so perfect.
the occupation of savannah, which i have heretofore reported,
completes the first part of our game, and fulfills a great part of
your instructions; and we are now engaged in dismantling the rebel
forts which bear upon the sea-channels, and transferring the heavy
ordnance and ammunition to fort pulaski and hilton head, where they
can be more easily guarded than if left in the city.
the rebel inner lines are well adapted to our purpose, and with
slight modifications can be held by a comparatively small force;
and in about ten days i expect to be ready to sally forth again. i
feel no doubt whatever as to our future plans. i have thought them
over so long and well that they appear as clear as daylight. i left
augusta untouched on purpose, because the enemy will be in doubt as
to my objective point, after we cross the savannah river, whether
it be augusta or charleston, and will naturally divide his forces.
i will then move either on branchville or colombia, by any curved
line that gives us the best supplies, breaking up in our course as
much railroad as possible; then, ignoring charleston and augusta
both, i would occupy columbia and camden, pausing there long enough
to observe the effect. i would then strike for the charleston &
wilmington railroad, somewhere between the santee and cape fear
rivers, and, if possible, communicate with the fleet under admiral
dahlgren (whom i find a most agreeable gentleman, accommodating
himself to our wishes and plans). then i would favor an attack on
wilmington, in the belief that porter and butler will fail in their
present undertaking. charleston is now a mere desolated wreck, and
is hardly worth the time it would take to starve it out. still, i
am aware that, historically and politically, much importance is
attached to the place, and it may be that, apart from its military
importance, both you and the administration may prefer i should
give it more attention; and it would be well for you to give me
some general idea on that subject, for otherwise i would treat it
as i have expressed, as a point of little importance, after all its
railroads leading into the interior have been destroyed or occupied
by us. but, on the hypothesis of ignoring charleston and taking
wilmington, i would then favor a movement direct on raleigh. the
game is then up with lee, unless he comes out of richmond, avoids
you and fights me; in which case i should reckon on your being on
his heels. now that hood is used up by thomas, i feel disposed to
bring the matter to an issue as quick as possible. i feel confident
that i can break up the whole railroad system of south carolina and
north carolina, and be on the roanoke, either at raleigh or weldon,
by the time spring fairly opens; and, if you feel confident that
you can whip lee outside of his intrenchments, i feel equally
confident that i can handle him in the open country.
one reason why i would ignore charleston is this: that i believe
hardee will reduce the garrison to a small force, with plenty of
provisions; i know that the neck back of charleston can be made
impregnable to assault, and we will hardly have time for siege
operations.
i will have to leave in savannah a garrison, and, if thomas can
spare them, i would like to have all detachments, convalescents,
etc., belonging to these four corps, sent forward at once. i do not
want to cripple thomas, because i regard his operations as
all-important, and i have ordered him to pursue hood down into
alabama, trusting to the country for supplies.
i reviewed one of my corps to-day, and shall continue to review the
whole army. i do not like to boast, but believe this army has a
confidence in itself that makes it almost invincible. i wish you
could run down and see us; it would have a good effect, and show to
both armies that they are acting on a common plan. the weather is
now cool and pleasant, and the general health very good. your true
friend,
w. t. sherman major-general.
in the field, savannah, georgia, december , .
major-general h. w. halleck, chief-of-staff; washington, d.
general: i had the pleasure of receiving your two letters of the
th and th instant to-day, and feel more than usually flattered
by the high encomiums you have passed on our recent campaign, which
is now complete by the occupation of savannah.
i am also very glad that general grant has changed his mind about
embarking my troops for james river, leaving me free to make the
broad swath you describe through south and north carolina; and
still more gratified at the news from thomas, in tennessee, because
it fulfills my plans, which contemplated his being able to dispose
of hood, in case he ventured north of the tennessee river. so, i
think, on the whole, i can chuckle over jeff. davis's
disappointment in not turning my atlanta campaign into a "moscow
disaster."
i have just finished a long letter to general grant, and have
explained to him that we are engaged in shifting our base from the
ogeeohee to the savannah river, dismantling all the forts made by
the enemy to bear upon the salt-water channels, transferring the
heavy ordnance, etc., to fort pulaski and hilton head, and in
remodeling the enemy's interior lines to suit our future plans and
purposes. i have also laid down the programme for a campaign which
i can make this winter, and which will put me in the spring on the
roanoke, in direct communication with general grant on james river.
in general terms, my plan is to turn over to general foster the
city of savannah, to sally forth with my army resupplied, cross the
savannah, feign on charleston and augusta, but strike between,
breaking en route the charleston & augusta railroad, also a
large part of that from branchville and camden toward north
carolina, and then rapidly to move for some point of the railroad
from charleston to wilmington, between the santee and cape fear
rivers; then, communicating with the fleet in the neighborhood of
georgetown, i would turn upon wilmington or charleston, according
to the importance of either. i rather prefer wilmington, as a live
place, over charleston, which is dead and unimportant when its
railroad communications are broken. i take it for granted that the
present movement on wilmington will fail. if i should determine to
take charleston, i would turn across the country (which i have
hunted over many a time) from santee to mount pleasant, throwing
one wing on the peninsula between the ashley and cooper. after
accomplishing one or other of these ends, i would make a bee-line
for raleigh or weldon, when lee world be forced to come out of
richmond, or acknowledge himself beaten. he would, i think, by the
use of the danville railroad, throw himself rapidly between me and
grant, leaving richmond in the hands of the latter. this would not
alarm me, for i have an army which i think can maneuver, and i
world force him to attack me at a disadvantage, always under the
supposition that grant would be on his heels; and, if the worst
come to the worst, i can fight my way down to albermarle sound, or
newbern.
i think the time has come now when we should attempt the boldest
moves, and my experience is, that they are easier of execution than
more timid ones, because the enemy is disconcerted by them--as, for
instance, my recent campaign.
i also doubt the wisdom of concentration beyond a certain extent,
for the roads of this country limit the amount of men that can be
brought to bear in any one battle, and i do not believe that any
one general can handle more than sixty thousand men in
battle.
i think our campaign of the last month, as well as every step i
take from this point northward, is as much a direct attack upon
lee's army as though we were operating within the sound of his
artillery.
i am very anxious that thomas should follow up his success to the
very utmost point. my orders to him before i left kingston were,
after beating hood, to follow him as far as columbus, mississippi,
or selma, alabama, both of which lie in districts of country which
are rich in corn and meat.
i attach more importance to these deep incisions into the enemy's
country, because this war differs from european wars in this
particular: we are not only fighting hostile armies, but a hostile
people, and must make old and young, rich and poor, feel the hard
hand of war, as well as their organized armies. i know that this
recent movement of mine through georgia has had a wonderful effect
in this respect. thousands who had been deceived by their lying
newspapers to believe that we were being whipped all the time now
realize the truth, and have no appetite for a repetition of the
same experience. to be sure, jeff. davis has his people under
pretty good discipline, but i think faith in him is much shaken in
georgia, and before we have done with her south carolina will not
be quite so tempestuous.
i will bear in mind your hint as to charleston, and do not think
"salt" will be necessary. when i move, the fifteenth corps will be
on the right of the right wing, and their position will naturally
bring them into charleston first; and, if you have watched the
history of that corps, you will have remarked that they generally
do their work pretty well. the truth is, the whole army is burning
with an insatiable desire to wreak vengeance upon south carolina. i
almost tremble at her fate, but feel that she deserves all that
seems in store for her.
many and many a person in georgia asked me why we did not go to
south carolina; and, when i answered that we were enroute for that
state, the invariable reply was, "well, if you will make those
people feel the utmost severities of war, we will pardon you for
your desolation of georgia."
i look upon colombia as quite as bad as charleston, and i doubt if
we shall spare the public buildings there as we did at
milledgeville.
i have been so busy lately that i have not yet made my official
report, and i think i had better wait until i get my subordinate
reports before attempting it, as i am anxious to explain clearly
not only the reasons for every step, but the amount of execution
done, and this i cannot do until i get the subordinate reports; for
we marched the whole distance in four or more columns, and, of
course, i could only be present with one, and generally that one
engaged in destroying railroads. this work of destruction was
performed better than usual, because i had an engineer-regiment,
provided with claws to twist the bars after being heated. such bars
can never be used again, and the only way in which a railroad line
can be reconstructed across georgia is, to make a new road from
fairburn station (twenty-four miles southwest of atlanta) to
madison, a distance of one hundred miles; and, before that can be
done, i propose to be on the road from augusta to charleston, which
is a continuation of the same. i felt somewhat disappointed at
hardee's escape, but really am not to blame. i moved as quickly as
possible to close up the "union causeway," but intervening
obstacles were such that, before i could get troops on the road,
hardee had slipped out. still, i know that the men that were in
savannah will be lost in a measure to jeff. davis, for the georgia
troops, under g. w. smith, declared they would not fight in south
carolina, and they have gone north, en route for augusta, and i
have reason to believe the north carolina troops have gone to
wilmington; in other words, they are scattered. i have reason to
believe that beauregard was present in savannah at the time of its
evacuation, and think that he and hardee are now in charleston,
making preparations for what they suppose will be my next
step.
please say to the president that i have received his kind message
(through colonel markland), and feel thankful for his high favor.
if i disappoint him in the future, it shall not be from want of
zeal or love to the cause.
from you i expect a full and frank criticism of my plans for the
future, which may enable me to correct errors before it is too
late. i do not wish to be rash, but want to give my rebel friends
no chance to accuse us of want of enterprise or courage.
assuring you of my high personal respect, i remain, as ever, your
friend,
w. t. sherman, major-general.
[general order no. .]
washington, january , .
the following resolution of the senate and house of representatives
is published to the army:
[public resolution--no. .]
joint resolution tendering the thanks of the people and of congress
to major-general william t. sherman, and the officers and soldiers
of his command, for their gallant conduct in their late brilliant
movement through georgia.
be it resolved by the senate and house of representatives of the
united states of america in congress assembled, that the thanks of
the people and of the congress of the united states are due and are
hereby tendered to major-general william t. sherman, and through
him to the officers and men under his command, for their gallantry
and good conduct in their late campaign from chattanooga to
atlanta, and the triumphal march thence through georgia to
savannah, terminating in the capture and occupation of that city;
and that the president cause a copy of this joint resolution to be
engrossed and forwarded to major-general sherman.
approved, january , .
by order of the secretary of war,
w. a. nichols, assistant adjutant-general.
the city of savannah was an old place, and usually accounted a
handsome one. its houses were of brick or frame, with large yards,
ornamented with shrubbery and flowers; its streets perfectly
regular, crossing each other at right angles; and at many of the
intersections were small inclosures in the nature of parks. these
streets and parks were lined with the handsomest shade-trees of
which i have knowledge, viz., the willow-leaf live-oak, evergreens
of exquisite beauty; and these certainly entitled savannah to its
reputation as a handsome town more than the houses, which, though
comfortable, would hardly make a display on fifth avenue or the
boulevard haussmann of paris. the city was built on a plateau of
sand about forty feet above the level of the sea, abutting against
the river, leaving room along its margin for a street of stores and
warehouses. the customhouse, court-house, post-office, etc., were
on the plateau above. in rear of savannah was a large park, with a
fountain, and between it and the court-house was a handsome
monument, erected to the memory of count pulaski, who fell in 
in the assault made on the city at the time it was held by the
english during the revolutionary war. outside of savannah there was
very little to interest a stranger, except the cemetery of
bonaventura, and the ride along the wilmington channel by way of
thunderbolt, where might be seen some groves of the majestic
live-oak trees, covered with gray and funereal moss, which were
truly sublime in grandeur, but gloomy after a few days' camping
under them:
within an hour of taking up my quarters in mr. green's house,
mr. a. g. browne, of salem, massachusetts, united states treasury
agent for the department of the south, made his appearance to claim
possession, in the name of the treasury department, of all captured
cotton, rice, buildings, etc. having use for these articles
ourselves, and having fairly earned them, i did not feel inclined
to surrender possession, and explained to him that the
quartermaster and commissary could manage them more to my liking
than he; but i agreed, after the proper inventories had been
prepared, if there remained any thing for which we had no special
use, i would turn it over to him. it was then known that in the
warehouses were stored at least twenty-five thousand bales of
cotton, and in the forts one hundred and fifty large, heavy
sea-coast guns: although afterward, on a more careful count, there
proved to be more than two hundred and fifty sea-coast or siege
guns, and thirty-one thousand bales of cotton. at that interview
mr. browne, who was a shrewd, clever yankee, told me that a vessel
was on the point of starting for old point comfort, and, if she had
good weather off cape hatteras, would reach fortress monroe by
christmas-day, and he suggested that i might make it the occasion
of sending a welcome christmas gift to the president, mr. lincoln,
who peculiarly enjoyed such pleasantry. i accordingly sat down and
wrote on a slip of paper, to be left at the telegraph-office at
fortress monroe for transmission, the following:
savannah georgia, december , . to his excellency president
lincoln, washington, d. c.:
i beg to present you as a christmas-gift the city of savannah, with
one hundred and fifty heavy guns and plenty of ammunition, also
about twenty five thousand bales of cotton.
w. t. sherman, major-general.
this message actually reached him on christmas-eve, was
extensively published in the newspapers, and made many a household
unusually happy on that festive day; and it was in the answer to
this dispatch that mr. lincoln wrote me the letter of december
th, already given, beginning with the words, "many, many thanks,"
etc., which he sent at the hands of general john a. logan, who
happened to be in washington, and was coming to savannah, to rejoin
his command.
on the d of december were made the following general orders
for the disposition of the troops in and about savannah:
[special field order no. .]
in the field, near savannah, georgia, december , .
savannah, being now in our possession, the river partially cleared
out, and measures having been taken to remove all obstructions,
will at once be made a grand depot for future operations:
. the chief-quartermaster, general euston, will, after giving the
necessary orders touching the transports in ogeechee river and
oasabaw sound, come in person to savannah, and take possession of
all public buildings, vacant storerooms, warehouses, etc., that may
be now or hereafter needed for any department of the army. no rents
will be paid by the government of the united states during the war,
and all buildings must be distributed according to the accustomed
rates of the quartermaster's department, as though they were public
property.
. the chief commissary of subsistence, colonel a. beckwith, will
transfer the grand depot of the army to the city of savannah,
secure possession of the needful buildings and offices, and give
the necessary orders, to the end that the army may be supplied
abundantly and well.
s. the chief-engineer, captain poe, will at once direct which of
the enemy's forts are to be retained for our use, and which
dismantled and destroyed. the chief ordnance-officer, captain
baylor, will in like manner take possession of all property
pertaining to his department captured from the enemy, and cause the
same to be collected and conveyed to points of security; all the
heavy coast-guns will be dismounted and carried to fort
pulaski.
. the troops, for the present, will be grouped about the city of
savannah, looking to convenience of camps; general slocum taking
from the savannah river around to the seven-mile post on the canal,
and general howard thence to the sea; general kilpatrick will hold
king's bridge until fort mcallister is dismantled, and the troops
withdrawn from the south side of the ogeechee, when he will take
post about anderson's plantation, on the plank-road, and picket all
the roads leading from the north and west.
. general howard will keep a small guard at forts rosedale,
beaulieu, wimberley, thunderbolt, and bonaventura, and he will
cause that shore and skidaway island to be examined very closely,
with a view to finding many and convenient points for the
embarkation of troops and wagons on seagoing vessels.
by order of major-general w. t. sherman,
l. m. dayton, aide-de-camp.
[special field order no. .]
in the field, near savannah, georgia, december , .
the city of savannah and surrounding country will be held as a
military post, and adapted to future military uses, but, as it
contains a population of some twenty thousand people, who must be
provided for, and as other citizens may come, it is proper to lay
down certain general principles, that all within its military
jurisdiction may understand their relative duties and
obligations.
. during war, the military is superior to civil authority, and,
where interests clash, the civil must give way; yet, where there is
no conflict, every encouragement should be given to well-disposed
and peaceful inhabitants to resume their usual pursuits. families
should be disturbed as little as possible in their residences, and
tradesmen allowed the free use of their shops, tools, etc.;
churches, schools, and all places of amusement and recreation,
should be encouraged, and streets and roads made perfectly safe to
persons in their pursuits. passes should not be exacted within the
line of outer pickets, but if any person shall abuse these
privileges by communicating with the enemy, or doing any act of
hostility to the government of the united states, he or she will be
punished with the utmost rigor of the law. commerce with the outer
world will be resumed to an extent commensurate with the wants of
the citizens, governed by the restrictions and rules of the
treasury department.
. the chief quartermaster and commissary of the army may give
suitable employment to the people, white and black, or transport
them to such points as they may choose where employment can be had;
and may extend temporary relief in the way of provisions and vacant
houses to the worthy and needy, until such time as they can help
themselves. they will select first the buildings for the necessary
uses of the army; next, a sufficient number of stores, to be turned
over to the treasury agent for trade-stores. all vacant
store-houses or dwellings, and all buildings belonging to absent
rebels, will be construed and used as belonging to the united
states, until such time as their titles can be settled by the
courts of the united states.
. the mayor and city council of savannah will continue to exercise
their functions, and will, in concert with the commanding officer
of the post and the chief-quartermaster, see that the
fire-companies are kept in organization, the streets cleaned and
lighted, and keep up a good understanding between the citizens and
soldiers. they will ascertain and report to the chief commissary of
subsistence, as soon as possible, the names and number of worthy
families that need assistance and support. the mayor will forth
with give public notice that the time has come when all must choose
their course, viz., remain within our lines, and conduct themselves
as good citizens, or depart in peace. he will ascertain the names
of all who choose to leave savannah, and report their names and
residence to the chief-quartermaster, that measures may be taken to
transport them beyond our lines.
. not more than two newspapers will be published in savannah;
their editors and proprietors will be held to the strictest
accountability, and will be punished severely, in person and
property, for any libelous publication, mischievous matter,
premature news, exaggerated statements, or any comments whatever
upon the acts of the constituted authorities; they will be held
accountable for such articles, even though copied from other
papers.
by order of major-general w. t. sherman,
l. m. dayton, aide-de-camp.
it was estimated that there were about twenty thousand
inhabitants in savannah, all of whom had participated more or less
in the war, and had no special claims to our favor, but i regarded
the war as rapidly drawing to a close, and it was becoming a
political question as to what was to be done with the people of the
south, both white and black, when the war was actually over. i
concluded to give them the option to remain or to join their
friends in charleston or augusta, and so announced in general
orders. the mayor, dr. arnold, was completely "subjugated," and,
after consulting with him, i authorized him to assemble his city
council to take charge generally of the interests of the people;
but warned all who remained that they must be strictly subordinate
to the military law, and to the interests of the general
government. about two hundred persona, mostly the families of men
in the confederate army, prepared to follow the fortunes of their
husbands and fathers, and these were sent in a steamboat under a
flag of truce, in charge of my aide captain audenried, to
charleston harbor, and there delivered to an officer of the
confederate army. but the great bulk of the inhabitants chose to
remain in savannah, generally behaved with propriety, and good
social relations at once arose between them and the army. shortly
after our occupation of savannah, a lady was announced at my
headquarters by the orderly or sentinel at the front-door, who was
ushered into the parlor, and proved to be the wife of general g. w.
smith, whom i had known about , when smith was on duty at west
point. she was a native of new london, connecticut, and very
handsome. she began her interview by presenting me a letter from
her husband, who then commanded a division of the georgia militia
in the rebel army, which had just quitted savannah, which letter
began, "dear sherman: the fortunes of war, etc-., compel me to
leave my wife in savannah, and i beg for her your courteous
protection," etc., etc. i inquired where she lived, and if anybody
was troubling her. she said she was boarding with a lady whose
husband had, in like manner with her own, gone off with hardee's
army; that a part of the house had been taken for the use of
major-general ward, of kentucky; that her landlady was approaching
her confinement, and was nervous at the noise which the younger
staff-officers made at night; etc. i explained to her that i could
give but little personal attention to such matters, and referred
her to general slocum, whose troops occupied the city. i afterward
visited her house, and saw, personally, that she had no reason to
complain. shortly afterward mr. hardee, a merchant of savannah,
came to me and presented a letter from his brother, the general, to
the same effect, alleging that his brother was a civilian, had
never taken up arms, and asked of me protection for his family, his
cotton, etc. to him i gave the general assurance that no harm was
designed to any of the people of savannah who would remain quiet
and peaceable, but that i could give him no guarantee as to his
cotton, for over it i had no absolute control; and yet still later
i received a note from the wife of general a. p. stewart (who
commanded a corps in hood's army), asking me to come to see her.
this i did, and found her to be a native of cincinnati, ohio,
wanting protection, and who was naturally anxious about the fate of
her husband, known to be with general hood, in tennessee,
retreating before general thomas. i remember that i was able to
assure her that he had not been killed or captured, up to that
date, and think that i advised her, instead of attempting to go in
pursuit of her husband, to go to cincinnati, to her uncle, judge
storer, there await the issue of events.
before i had reached savannah, and during our stay there, the
rebel officers and newspapers represented the conduct of the men of
our army as simply infamous; that we respected neither age nor sex;
that we burned every thing we came across--barns, stables,
cotton-gins, and even dwelling-houses; that we ravished the women
and killed the men, and perpetrated all manner of outrages on the
inhabitants. therefore it struck me as strange that generals hardee
and smith should commit their, families to our custody, and even
bespeak our personal care and attention. these officers knew well
that these reports were exaggerated in the extreme, and yet tacitly
assented to these publications, to arouse the drooping energies of
the people of the south.
as the division of major-general john w. geary, of the twentieth
corps, was the first to enter savannah, that officer was appointed
to command the place, or to act as a sort of governor. he very soon
established a good police, maintained admirable order, and i doubt
if savannah, either before or since, has had a better government
than during our stay. the guard-mountings and parades, as well as
the greater reviews, became the daily resorts of the ladies, to
hear the music of our excellent bands; schools were opened, and the
churches every sunday were well filled with most devout and
respectful congregations; stores were reopened, and markets for
provisions, meat, wood, etc., were established, so that each
family, regardless of race, color, or opinion, could procure all
the necessaries and even luxuries of life, provided they had money.
of course, many families were actually destitute of this, and to
these were issued stores from our own stock of supplies. i remember
to have given to dr. arnold, the mayor, an order for the contents
of a large warehouse of rice, which he confided to a committee of
gentlemen, who went north (to boston), and soon returned with one
or more cargoes of flour, hams, sugar, coffee, etc., for gratuitous
distribution, which relieved the most pressing wants until the
revival of trade and business enabled the people to provide for
themselves.
a lady, whom i had known in former years as miss josephine
goodwin, told me that, with a barrel of flour and some sugar which
she had received gratuitously from the commissary, she had baked
cakes and pies, in the sale of which she realized a profit of
fifty-six dollars.
meantime colonel poe had reconnoitred and laid off new lines of
parapet, which would enable a comparatively small garrison to hold
the place, and a heavy detail of soldiers was put to work thereon;
generals easton and beckwith had organized a complete depot of
supplies; and, though vessels arrived almost daily with mails and
provisions, we were hardly ready to initiate a new and hazardous
campaign. i had not yet received from general grant or general
halleck any modification of the orders of december ,, to
embark my command for virginia by sea; but on the d of january,
, general j. g. barnard, united states engineers, arrived
direct from general grant's headquarters, bearing the following
letter, in the general's own handwriting, which, with my answer, is
here given:
city point, virginia, december , .
major-general w. t. sherman, commanding military division of the
mississippi.
general: before writing you definite instructions for the next
campaign, i wanted to receive your answer to my letter written from
washington. your confidence in being able to march up and join this
army pleases me, and i believe it can be done. the effect of such a
campaign will be to disorganize the south, and prevent the
organization of new armies from their broken fragments. hood is now
retreating, with his army broken and demoralized. his loss in men
has probably not been far from twenty thousand, besides deserters.
if time is given, the fragments may be collected together and many
of the deserters reassembled. if we can, we should act to prevent
this. your spare army, as it were, moving as proposed, will do
it.
in addition to holding savannah, it looks to me that an intrenched
camp ought to be held on the railroad between savannah and
charleston. your movement toward branchville will probably enable
foster to reach this with his own force. this will give us a
position in the south from which we can threaten the interior
without marching over long, narrow causeways, easily defended, as
we have heretofore been compelled to do. could not such a camp be
established about pocotaligo or coosawhatchie?
i have thought that, hood being so completely wiped out for present
harm, i might bring a. j. smith here, with fourteen to fifteen
thousand men. with this increase i could hold my lines, and move
out with a greater force than lee has. it would compel lee to
retain all his present force in the defenses of richmond or abandon
them entirely. this latter contingency is probably the only danger
to the easy success of your expedition. in the event you should
meet lee's army, you would be compelled to beat it or find the
sea-coast. of course, i shall not let lee's army escape if i can
help it, and will not let it go without following to the best of my
ability.
without waiting further directions, than, you may make your
preparations to start on your northern expedition without delay.
break up the railroads in south and north carolina, and join the
armies operating against richmond as soon as you can. i will leave
out all suggestions about the route you should take, knowing that
your information, gained daily in the course of events, will be
better than any that can be obtained now.
it may not be possible for you to march to the rear of petersburg;
but, failing in this, you could strike either of the sea-coast
ports in north carolina held by us. from there you could take
shipping. it would be decidedly preferable, however, if you could
march the whole distance.
from the best information i have, you will find no difficulty in
supplying your army until you cross the roanoke. from there here is
but a few days' march, and supplies could be collected south of the
river to bring you through. i shall establish communication with
you there, by steamboat and gunboat. by this means your wants can
be partially supplied. i shall hope to hear from you soon, and to
hear your plan, and about the time of starting.
please instruct foster to hold on to all the property in savannah,
and especially the cotton. do not turn it over to citizens or
treasury agents, without orders of the war department.
very respectfully, your obedient servant,
u. s. grant, lieutenant-general.
in the field, near savannah, georgia, january , .
lieutenant-general u. s. grant, city point.
general: i have received, by the hands of general barnard, your
note of th and letter of th december.
i herewith inclose to you a copy of a projet which i have this
morning, in strict confidence, discussed with my immediate
commanders.
i shall need, however, larger supplies of stores, especially grain.
i will inclose to you, with this, letters from general easton,
quartermaster, and colonel beckwith, commissary of subsistence,
setting forth what will be required, and trust you will forward
them to washington with your sanction, so that the necessary steps
may be taken at once to enable me to carry out this plan on
time.
i wrote you very fully on the th, and have nothing to add. every
thing here is quiet, and if i can get the necessary supplies in our
wagons, shall be ready to start at the time indicated in my projet
(january th). but, until those supplies are in hand, i can do
nothing; after they are, i shall be ready to move with great
rapidity.
i have heard of the affair at cape fear. it has turned out as you
will remember i expected.
i have furnished general easton a copy of the dispatch from the
secretary of war. he will retain possession of all cotton here, and
ship it as fast as vessels can be had to new york.
i shall immediately send the seventeenth corps over to port royal,
by boats, to be furnished by admiral dahlgren and general foster
(without interfering with general easton's vessels), to make a
lodgment on the railroad at pocotaligo.
general barnard will remain with me a few days, and i send this by
a staff-officer, who can return on one of the vessels of the
supply-fleet. i suppose that, now that general butler has got
through with them, you can spare them to us.
my report of recent operations is nearly ready, and will be sent
you in a day or two, as soon as some farther subordinate reports
come in.
i am, with great respect, very truly, your friend,
w. t. sherman, major-general.
[entirely confidential]
. right wing to move men and artillery by transports to head of
broad river and beaufort; reestablish port royal ferry, and mass
the wing at or in the neighborhood of pocotaligo.
left wing and cavalry to work slowly across the causeway toward
hardeeville, to open a road by which wagons can reach their corps
about broad river; also, by a rapid movement of the left, to secure
sister's ferry, and augusta road out to robertsville.
in the mean time, all guns, shot, shell, cotton, etc., to be moved
to a safe place, easy to guard, and provisions and wagons got ready
for another swath, aiming to have our army in hand about the head
of broad river, say pocotaligo, robertsville, and coosawhatchie, by
the th january.
. the whole army to move with loaded wagons by the roads leading
in the direction of columbia, which afford the best chance of
forage and provisions. howard to be at pocotaligo by the th
january, and slocum to be at robertsville, and kilpatrick at or
near coosawhatchie about the same date. general fosters troops to
occupy savannah, and gunboats to protect the rivers as soon as
howard gets pocotaligo.
w. t. sherman, major-general.
therefore, on the d of january, i was authorized to march with
my entire army north by land, and concluded at once to secure a
foothold or starting-point on the south carolina side, selecting
pocotaligo and hardeeville as the points of rendezvous for the two
wings; but i still remained in doubt as to the wishes of the
administration, whether i should take charleston en route, or
confine my whole attention to the incidental advantages of breaking
up the railways of south and north carolina, and the greater object
of uniting my army with that of general grant before richmond.
general barnard remained with me several days, and was regarded
then, as now, one of the first engineers of the age, perfectly
competent to advise me on the strategy and objects of the new
campaign. he expressed himself delighted with the high spirit of
the army, the steps already taken, by which we had captured
savannah, and he personally inspected some of the forts, such as
thunderbolt and causten's bluff, by which the enemy had so long
held at bay the whole of our navy, and had defeated the previous
attempts made in april, , by the army of general gillmore,
which had bombarded and captured fort pulaski, but had failed to
reach the city of savannah. i think general barnard expected me to
invite him to accompany us northward in his official capacity; but
colonel poe, of my staff, had done so well, and was so perfectly
competent, that i thought it unjust to supersede him by a senior in
his own corps. i therefore said nothing of this to general barnard,
and soon after he returned to his post with general grant, at city
point, bearing letters and full personal messages of our situation
and wants.
we were very much in want of light-draught steamers for
navigating the shallow waters of the coast, so that it took the
seventeenth corps more than a week to transfer from thunderbolt to
beaufort, south carolina. admiral dahlgren had supplied the harvest
moon and the pontiac, and general foster gave us a couple of hired
steamers; i was really amused at the effect this short sea-voyage
had on our men, most of whom had never before looked upon the
ocean. of course, they were fit subjects for sea-sickness, and
afterward they begged me never again to send them to sea, saying
they would rather march a thousand miles on the worst roads of the
south than to spend a single night on the ocean. by the th
general howard had collected the bulk of the seventeenth corps
(general blair) on beaufort island, and began his march for
pocotaligo, twenty-five miles inland. they crossed the channel
between the island and main-land during saturday, the th of
january, by a pontoon-bridge, and marched out to garden's corners,
where there was some light skirmishing; the next day, sunday, they
continued on to pocotaligo, finding the strong fort there
abandoned, and accordingly made a lodgment on the railroad, having
lost only two officers and eight men.
about the same time general slocum crossed two divisions of the
twentieth corps over the savannah river, above the city, occupied
hardeeville by one division and purysburg by another. thus, by the
middle of january, we had effected a lodgment in south carolina,
and were ready to resume the march northward; but we had not yet
accumulated enough provisions and forage to fill the wagons, and
other causes of delay occurred, of which i will make mention in due
order.
on the last day of december, , captain breese, united states
navy, flag-officer to admiral porter, reached savannah, bringing
the first news of general butler's failure at fort fisher, and that
the general had returned to james river with his land-forces,
leaving admiral porter's fleet anchored off cape fear, in that
tempestuous season. captain breese brought me a letter from the
admiral, dated december th, asking me to send him from savannah
one of my old divisions, with which he said he would make short
work of fort fisher; that he had already bombarded and silenced its
guns, and that general butler had failed because he was afraid to
attack, or even give the order to attack, after (as porter
insisted) the guns of fort fisher had been actually silenced by the
navy.
i answered him promptly on the st of december, that i proposed
to march north inland, and that i would prefer to leave the rebel
garrisons on the coast, instead of dislodging and piling them up in
my front as we progressed. from the chances, as i then understood
them, i supposed that fort fisher was garrisoned by a comparatively
small force, while the whole division of general hoke remained
about the city of wilmington; and that, if fort fisher were
captured, it would leave general hoke free to join the larger force
that would naturally be collected to oppose my progress northward.
i accordingly answered admiral porter to this effect, declining to
loan him the use of one of my divisions. it subsequently
transpired, however, that, as soon as general butler reached city
point, general grant was unwilling to rest under a sense of
failure, and accordingly dispatched back the same troops,
reenforced and commanded by general a. h. terry, who, on the th
day of january, successfully assaulted and captured fort fisher,
with its entire garrison. after the war was over, about the th of
may, when i was giving my testimony before the congressional
committee on the conduct of the war, the chairman of the committee,
senator b. f. wade, of ohio, told me that general butler had been
summoned before that committee during the previous january, and had
just finished his demonstration to their entire satisfaction that
fort fisher could not be carried by assault, when they heard the
newsboy in the hall crying out an "extra" calling him in, they
inquired the news, and he answered, "fort fisher done took!" of
course, they all laughed, and none more heartily than general
butler himself.
on the th of january there arrived at savannah a
revenue-cutter, having on board simeon draper, esq., of new york
city, the hon. e. m. stanton, secretary of war,
quartermaster-general meigs, adjutant-general townsend, and a
retinue of civilians, who had come down from the north to regulate
the civil affairs of savannah....
i was instructed by mr. stanton to transfer to mr. draper the
custom house, post-office, and such other public buildings as these
civilians needed in the execution of their office, and to cause to
be delivered into their custody the captured cotton. this was
accomplished by--
[special field orders, no. .]
in the field, near savannah, georgia, january , .
. brevet brigadier-general euston, chief-quartermaster, will turn
over to simeon draper, esq., agent of the united states treasury
department, all cotton now in the city of savannah, prize of war,
taking his receipt for the same in gross, and returning for it to
the quartermaster-general. he will also afford mr. draper all the
facilities in his power in the way of transportation, labor, etc.,
to enable him to handle the cotton with expedition.
. general euston will also turn over to mr. draper the
custom-house, and such other buildings in the city of savannah as
he may need in the execution of his office.
by order of general w. t. sherman,
l. m. dayton, aide-de-camp.
up to this time all the cotton had been carefully guarded, with
orders to general euston to ship it by the return-vessels to new
york, for the adjudication of the nearest prize-court, accompanied
with invoices and all evidence of title to ownership. marks,
numbers, and other figures, were carefully preserved on the bales,
so that the court might know the history of each bale. but mr.
stanton, who surely was an able lawyer, changed all this, and
ordered the obliteration of all the marks; so that no man, friend
or foe, could trace his identical cotton. i thought it strange at
the time, and think it more so now; for i am assured that claims,
real and fictitious, have been proved up against this identical
cotton of three times the quantity actually captured, and that
reclamations on the treasury have been allowed for more than the
actual quantity captured, viz., thirty-one thousand bales.
mr. stanton staid in savannah several days, and seemed very
curious about matters and things in general. i walked with him
through the city, especially the bivouacs of the several regiments
that occupied the vacant squares, and he seemed particularly
pleased at the ingenuity of the men in constructing their temporary
huts. four of the "dog-tents," or tentes d'abri, buttoned together,
served for a roof, and the sides were made of clapboards, or rough
boards brought from demolished houses or fences. i remember his
marked admiration for the hut of a soldier who had made his door
out of a handsome parlor mirror, the glass gone and its gilt frame
serving for his door.
he talked to me a great deal about the negroes, the former
slaves, and i told him of many interesting incidents, illustrating
their simple character and faith in our arms and progress. he
inquired particularly about general jeff. c. davis, who, he said,
was a democrat, and hostile to the negro. i assured him that
general davis was an excellent soldier, and i did not believe he
had any hostility to the negro; that in our army we had no negro
soldiers, and, as a rule, we preferred white soldiers, but that we
employed a large force of them as servants, teamsters, and
pioneers, who had rendered admirable service. he then showed me a
newspaper account of general davis taking up his pontoon-bridge
across ebenezer creek, leaving sleeping negro men, women, and
children, on the other side, to be slaughtered by wheeler's
cavalry. i had heard such a rumor, and advised mr. stanton, before
becoming prejudiced, to allow me to send for general davis, which
he did, and general davis explained the matter to his entire
satisfaction. the truth was, that, as we approached the seaboard,
the freedmen in droves, old and young, followed the several columns
to reach a place of safety. it so happened that general davis's
route into savannah followed what was known as the "river-road,"
and he had to make constant use of his pontoon-train--the head of
his column reaching some deep, impassable creek before the rear was
fairly over another. he had occasionally to use the pontoons both
day and night. on the occasion referred to, the bridge was taken up
from ebenezer creek while some of the camp-followers remained
asleep on the farther side, and these were picked up by wheeler's
cavalry. some of them, in their fright, were drowned in trying to
swim over, and others may have been cruelly killed by wheeler's
men, but this was a mere supposition. at all events, the same thing
might have resulted to general howard, or to any other of the many
most humane commanders who filled the army. general jeff. c. davis
was strictly a soldier, and doubtless hated to have his wagons and
columns encumbered by these poor negroes, for whom we all felt
sympathy, but a sympathy of a different sort from that of mr.
stanton, which was not of pure humanity, but of politics. the negro
question was beginning to loom up among the political eventualities
of the day, and many foresaw that not only would the slaves secure
their freedom, but that they would also have votes. i did not dream
of such a result then, but knew that slavery, as such, was dead
forever, and did not suppose that the former slaves would be
suddenly, without preparation, manufactured into voters, equal to
all others, politically and socially. mr. stanton seemed desirous
of coming into contact with the negroes to confer with them, and he
asked me to arrange an interview for him. i accordingly sent out
and invited the most intelligent of the negroes, mostly baptist and
methodist preachers, to come to my rooms to meet the secretary of
war. twenty responded, and were received in my room up-stairs in
mr. green's house, where mr. stanton and adjutant-general townsend
took down the conversation in the form of questions and answers.
each of the twenty gave his name and partial history, and then
selected garrison frazier as their spokesman:
first question. state what your understanding is in regard to
the acts of congress and president lincoln's proclamation touching
the colored people in the rebel states?
answer. so far as i understand president lincoln's proclamation
to the rebel states, it is, that if they will lay down their arms
and submit to the laws of the united states, before the st of
january, , all should be well; but if they did not, then all
the slaves in the southern states should be free, henceforth and
forever. that is what i understood.
second question. state what you understand by slavery, and the
freedom that was to be given by the president's proclamation?
answer. slavery is receiving by irresistible power the work of
another man, and not by his consent. the freedom, as i understand
it, promised by the proclamation, is taking us from under the yoke
of bondage and placing us where we can reap the fruit of our own
labor, and take care of ourselves and assist the government in
maintaining our freedom.
fourth question. state in what manner you would rather
live--whether scattered among the whites, or in colonies by
yourselves?
answer. i would prefer to live by ourselves, for there is a
prejudice against us in the south that will take years to get over;
but i do not know that i can answer for my brethren.
(all but mr. lynch, a missionary from the north, agreed with
frazier, but he thought they ought to live together, along with the
whites.)
eighth question. if the rebel leaders were to arm the slaves,
what would be its effect?
answer. i think they would fight as long as they were before the
"bayonet," and just as soon as they could get away they would
desert, in my opinion.
tenth question. do you understand the mode of enlistment of
colored persons in the rebel states by state agents, under the act
of congress; if yea, what is your understanding?
answer. my understanding is, that colored persons enlisted by
state agents are enlisted as substitutes, and give credit to the
state and do not swell the army, because every black man enlisted
by a state agent leaves a white man at home; and also that larger
bounties are given, or promised, by the state agents than are given
by the united states. the great object should be to push through
this rebellion the shortest way; and there seems to be something
wanting in the enlistment by state agents, for it don't strengthen
the army, but takes one away for every colored man enlisted.
eleventh question. state what, in your opinion, is the best way
to enlist colored men as soldiers?
answer. i think, sir, that all compulsory operations should be
put a stop to. the ministers would talk to them, and the young men
would enlist. it is my opinion that it world be far better for the
state agents to stay at home and the enlistments be made for the
united states under the direction of general sherman.
up to this time i was present, and, on mr. stanton's intimating
that he wanted to ask some questions affecting me, i withdrew, and
then he put the twelfth and last question.
twelfth question. state what is the feeling of the colored
people toward general sherman, and how far do they regard his
sentiments and actions as friendly to their rights and interests,
or otherwise.
answer. we looked upon general sherman, prior to his arrival, as
a man, in the providence of god, specially set apart to accomplish
this work, and we unanimously felt inexpressible gratitude to him,
looking upon him as a man who should be honored for the faithful
performance of his duty. some of us called upon him immediately
upon his arrival, and it is probable he did not meet the secretary
with more courtesy than he did us. his conduct and deportment
toward us characterized him as a friend and gentleman. we have
confidence in general sherman, and think what concerns us could not
be in better hands. this is our opinion now, from the short
acquaintance and intercourse we have had.
it certainly was a strange fact that the great war secretary
should have catechized negroes concerning the character of a
general who had commanded a hundred thousand men in battle, had
captured cities conducted sixty-five thousand men successfully
across four hundred miles of hostile territory, and had just
brought tens of thousands of freedmen to a place of security; but
because i had not loaded down my army by other hundreds of
thousands of poor negroes, i was construed by others as hostile to
the black race. i had received from general halleck, at washington,
a letter warning me that there were certain influential parties
near the president who were torturing him with suspicions of my
fidelity to him and his negro policy; but i shall always believe
that mr. lincoln, though a civilian, knew better, and appreciated
my motives and character. though this letter of general halleck has
always been treated by me as confidential, i now insert it here at
length:
washington, d.c., december , .
major-general w. t. sherman, savannah.
my dear general: i take the liberty of calling your attention, in
this private and friendly way, to a matter which may possibly
hereafter be of more importance to you than either of us may now
anticipate.
while almost every one is praising your great march through
georgia, and the capture of savannah, there is a certain class
having now great influence with the president, and very probably
anticipating still more on a change of cabinet, who are decidedly
disposed to make a point against you. i mean in regard to
"inevitable sambo." they say that you have manifested an almost
criminal dislike to the negro, and that you are not willing to
carry out the wishes of the government in regard to him, but
repulse him with contempt! they say you might have brought with you
to savannah more than fifty thousand, thus stripping georgia of
that number of laborers, and opening a road by which as many more
could have escaped from their masters; but that, instead of this,
you drove them from your ranks, prevented their following you by
cutting the bridges in your rear, and thus caused the massacre of
large numbers by wheeler's cavalry.
to those who know you as i do, such accusation will pass as the
idle winds, for we presume that you discouraged the negroes from
following you because you had not the means of supporting them, and
feared they might seriously embarrass your march. but there are
others, and among them some in high authority, who think or pretend
to think otherwise, and they are decidedly disposed to make a point
against you.
i do not write this to induce you to conciliate this class of men
by doing any thing which you do not deem right and proper, and for
the interest of the government and the country; but simply to call
your attention to certain things which are viewed here somewhat
differently than from your stand-point. i will explain as briefly
as possible:
some here think that, in view of the scarcity of labor in the
south, and the probability that a part, at least, of the
able-bodied slaves will be called into the military service of the
rebels, it is of the greatest importance to open outlets by which
these slaves can escape into our lines, and they say that the route
you have passed over should be made the route of escape, and
savannah the great place of refuge. these, i know, are the views of
some of the leading men in the administration, and they now express
dissatisfaction that you did not carry them out in your great
raid.
now that you are in possession of savannah, and there can be no
further fears about supplies, would it not be possible for you to
reopen these avenues of escape for the negroes, without interfering
with your military operations? could not such escaped slaves find
at least a partial supply of food in the rice-fields about
savannah, and cotton plantations on the coast?
i merely throw out these suggestions. i know that such a course
would be approved by the government, and i believe that a
manifestation on your part of a desire to bring the slaves within
our lines will do much to silence your opponents. you will
appreciate my motives in writing this private letter. yours
truly,
there is no doubt that mr. stanton, when he reached savannah,
shared these thoughts, but luckily the negroes themselves convinced
him that he was in error, and that they understood their own
interests far better than did the men in washington, who tried to
make political capital out of this negro question. the idea that
such men should have been permitted to hang around mr. lincoln, to
torture his life by suspicions of the officers who were toiling
with the single purpose to bring the war to a successful end, and
thereby to liberate all slaves, is a fair illustration of the
influences that poison a political capital.
my aim then was, to whip the rebels, to humble their pride, to
follow them to their inmost recesses, and make them fear and dread
us. "fear of the lord is the beginning of wisdom." i did not want
them to cast in our teeth what general hood had once done in
atlanta, that we had to call on their slaves to help us to subdue
them. but, as regards kindness to the race, encouraging them to
patience and forbearance, procuring them food and clothing, and
providing them with land whereon to labor, i assert that no army
ever did more for that race than the one i commanded in savannah.
when we reached savannah, we were beset by ravenous state agents
from hilton head, who enticed and carried away our servants, and
the corps of pioneers which we had organized, and which had done
such excellent service. on one occasion, my own aide-de-camp,
colonel audenried, found at least a hundred poor negroes shut up in
a house and pen, waiting for the night, to be conveyed stealthily
to hilton head. they appealed to him for protection, alleging that
they had been told that they must be soldiers, that "massa lincoln"
wanted them, etc. i never denied the slaves a full opportunity for
voluntary enlistment, but i did prohibit force to be used, for i
knew that the state agents were more influenced by the profit they
derived from the large bounties then being paid than by any love of
country or of the colored race. in the language of mr. frazier, the
enlistment of every black man "did not strengthen the army, but
took away one white man from the ranks."
during mr. stanton's stay in savannah we discussed this negro
question very fully; he asked me to draft an order on the subject,
in accordance with my own views, that would meet the pressing
necessities of the case, and i did so. we went over this order, no.
, of january , , very carefully. the secretary made some
verbal modifications, when it was approved by him in all its
details, i published it, and it went into operation at once. it
provided fully for the enlistment of colored troops, and gave the
freedmen certain possessory rights to land, which afterward became
matters of judicial inquiry and decision. of course, the military
authorities at that day, when war prevailed, had a perfect right to
grant the possession of any vacant land to which they could extend
military protection, but we did not undertake to give a fee-simple
title; and all that was designed by these special field orders was
to make temporary provisions for the freedmen and their families
during the rest of the war, or until congress should take action in
the premises. all that i now propose to assert is, that mr.
stanton, secretary of war, saw these orders in the rough, and
approved every paragraph thereof, before they were made
public:
[special field orders, no. .]
in the field, near savannah, georgia, january , .
. the islands from charleston south, the abandoned rice-fields
along the rivers for thirty miles back from the sea, and the
country bordering the st. john's river, florida, are reserved and
set apart for the settlement of the negroes now made free by the
acts of war and the proclamation of the president of the united
states.
. at beaufort, hilton head, savannah, fernandina, st. augustine,
and jacksonville, the blacks may remain in their chosen or
accustomed vocations; but on the islands, and in the settlements
hereafter to be established, no white person whatever, unless
military officers and soldiers detailed for duty, will be permitted
to reside; and the sole and exclusive management of affairs will be
left to the freed people themselves, subject only to the united
states military authority, and the acts of congress. by the laws of
war, and orders of the president of the united states, the negro is
free, and must be dealt with as such. he cannot be subjected to
conscription, or forced military service, save by the written
orders of the highest military authority of the department, under
such regulations as the president or congress may prescribe.
domestic servants, blacksmiths, carpenters, and other mechanics,
will be free to select their own work and residence, but the young
and able-bodied negroes must be encouraged to enlist as soldiery in
the service of the united states, to contribute their share toward
maintaining their own freedom, and securing their rights as
citizens of the united states.
negroes so enlisted will be organized into companies, battalions,
and regiments, under the orders of the united states military
authorities, and will be paid, fed, and clothed; according to law.
the bounties paid on enlistment may, with the consent of the
recruit, go to assist his family and settlement in procuring
agricultural implements, seed, tools, boots, clothing, and other
articles necessary for their livelihood.
. whenever three respectable negroes, heads of families, shall
desire to settle on land, and shall have selected for that purpose
an island or a locality clearly defined within the limits above
designated, the inspector of settlements and plantations will
himself, or, by such subordinate officer as he may appoint, give
them a license to settle such island or district, and afford them
such assistance as he can to enable them to establish a peaceable
agricultural settlement. the three parties named will subdivide the
land, under the supervision of the inspector, among themselves, and
such others as may choose to settle near them, so that each family
shall have a plot of not more than forty acres of tillable ground,
and, when it borders on some water-channel, with not more than
eight hundred feet water-front, in the possession of which land the
military authorities will afford them protection until such time as
they can protect themselves, or until congress shall regulate their
title. the quartermaster may, on the requisition of the inspector
of settlements and plantations, place at the disposal of the
inspector one or more of the captured steamers to ply between the
settlements and one or more of the commercial points heretofore
named, in order to afford the settlers the opportunity to supply
their necessary wants, and to sell the products of their land and
labor.
. whenever a negro has enlisted in the military service of the
united states, he may locate his family in any one of the
settlements at pleasure, and acquire a homestead, and all other
rights and privileges of a settler, as though present in person. in
like manner, negroes may settle their families and engage on board
the gunboats, or in fishing, or in the navigation of the inland
waters, without losing any claim to land or other advantages
derived from this system. but no one, unless an actual settler as
above defined, or unless absent on government service, will be
entitled to claim any right to land or property in any settlement
by virtue of these orders.
. in order to carry out this system of settlement, a general
officer will be detailed as inspector of settlements and
plantations, whose duty it shall be to visit the settlements, to
regulate their police and general arrangement, and who will furnish
personally to each head of a family, subject to the approval of the
president of the united states, a possessory title in writing,
giving as near as possible the description of boundaries; and who
shall adjust all claims or conflicts that may arise under the same,
subject to the like approval, treating such titles altogether as
possessory. the same general officer will also be charged with the
enlistment and organization of the negro recruits, and protecting
their interests while absent from their settlements; and will be
governed by the rules and regulations prescribed by the war
department for such purposes.
. brigadier-general r. saxton is hereby appointed inspector of
settlements and plantations, and will at once enter on the
performance of his duties. no change is intended or desired in the
settlement now on beaufort island, nor will any rights to property
heretofore acquired be affected thereby.
by order of major-general w. t. sherman, l. m. dayton, assistant
adjutant-general.
i saw a good deal of the secretary socially, during the time of
his visit to savannah. he kept his quarters on the revenue-cutter
with simeon draper, esq., which cutter lay at a wharf in the river,
but he came very often to my quarters at mr. green's house. though
appearing robust and strong, he complained a good deal of internal
pains, which he said threatened his life, and would compel him soon
to quit public office. he professed to have come from washington
purposely for rest and recreation, and he spoke unreservedly of the
bickerings and jealousies at the national capital; of the
interminable quarrels of the state governors about their quotas,
and more particularly of the financial troubles that threatened the
very existence of the government itself. he said that the price of
every thing had so risen in comparison with the depreciated money,
that there was danger of national bankruptcy, and he appealed to
me, as a soldier and patriot, to hurry up matters so as to bring
the war to a close.
he left for port royal about the th of january, and promised
to go north without delay, so as to hurry back to me the supplies i
had called for, as indispensable for the prosecution of the next
stage of the campaign. i was quite impatient to get off myself, for
a city-life had become dull and tame, and we were all anxious to
get into the pine-woods again, free from the importunities of rebel
women asking for protection, and of the civilians from the north
who were coming to savannah for cotton and all sorts of profit.
on the th of january general slocum was ordered to turn over
the city of savannah to general j. g. foster, commanding the
department of the south, who proposed to retain his own
headquarters at hilton head, and to occupy savannah by general
grovers division of the nineteenth corps, just arrived from james
river; and on the next day, viz., january th, i made the first
general orders for the move.
these were substantially to group the right wing of the army at
pocotaligo, already held by the seventeenth corps, and the left
wing and cavalry at or near robertsville, in south carolina. the
army remained substantially the same as during the march from
atlanta, with the exception of a few changes in the commanders of
brigades and divisions, the addition of some men who had joined
from furlough, and the loss of others from the expiration of their
term of service. my own personal staff remained the same, with the
exception that general w. f. barry had rejoined us at savannah,
perfectly recovered from his attack of erysipelas, and continued
with us to the end of the war. generals easton and beckwith
remained at savannah, in charge of their respective depots, with
orders to follow and meet us by sea with supplies when we should
reach the coast at wilmington or newbern, north carolina.
of course, i gave out with some ostentation, especially among
the rebels, that we were going to charleston or augusta; but i had
long before made up my mind to waste no time on either, further
than to play off on their fears, thus to retain for their
protection a force of the enemy which would otherwise concentrate
in our front, and make the passage of some of the great rivers that
crossed our route more difficult and bloody.
having accomplished all that seemed necessary, on the st of
january, with my entire headquarters, officers, clerks, orderlies,
etc., with wagons and horses, i embarked in a steamer for beaufort,
south carolina, touching at hilton head, to see general foster. the
weather was rainy and bad, but we reached beaufort safely on the
d, and found some of general blair's troops there. the pink of
his corps (seventeenth) was, however, up on the railroad about
pocotaligo, near the head of broad river, to which their supplies
were carried from hilton head by steamboats. general hatch's
division (of general foster's command) was still at coosawhatchie
or tullafinny, where the charleston & savannah railroad crosses
the river of that name. all the country between beaufort and
pocotaligo was low alluvial land, cut up by an infinite number of
salt-water sloughs and freshwater creeks, easily susceptible of
defense by a small force; and why the enemy had allowed us to make
a lodgment at pocotaligo so easily i did not understand, unless it
resulted from fear or ignorance. it seemed to me then that the
terrible energy they had displayed in the earlier stages of the war
was beginning to yield to the slower but more certain industry and
discipline of our northern men. it was to me manifest that the
soldiers and people of the south entertained an undue fear of our
western men, and, like children, they had invented such ghostlike
stories of our prowess in georgia, that they were scared by their
own inventions. still, this was a power, and i intended to utilize
it. somehow, our men had got the idea that south carolina was the
cause of all our troubles; her people were the first to fire on
fort sumter, had been in a great hurry to precipitate the country
into civil war; and therefore on them should fall the scourge of
war in its worst form. taunting messages had also come to us, when
in georgia, to the effect that, when we should reach south
carolina, we would find a people less passive, who would fight us
to the bitter end, daring us to come over, etc.; so that i saw and
felt that we would not be able longer to restrain our men as we had
done in georgia.
personally i had many friends in charleston, to whom i would
gladly have extended protection and mercy, but they were beyond my
personal reach, and i would not restrain the army lest its vigor
and energy should be impaired; and i had every reason to expect
bold and strong resistance at the many broad and deep rivers that
lay across our path.
general foster's department of the south had been enlarged to
embrace the coast of north carolina, so that the few troops serving
there, under the command of general innis n. palmer, at newbern,
became subject to my command. general a. h. terry held fort fisher,
and a rumor came that he had taken the city of wilmington; but this
was premature. he had about eight thousand men. general schofield
was also known to be en route from nashville for north carolina,
with the entire twenty-third corps, so that i had every reason to
be satisfied that i would receive additional strength as we
progressed northward, and before i should need it.
general w. j. hardee commanded the confederate forces in
charleston, with the salkiehatchie river as his line of defense. it
was also known that general beauregard had come from the direction
of tennessee, and had assumed the general command of all the troops
designed to resist our progress.
the heavy winter rains had begun early in january, rendered the
roads execrable, and the savannah river became so swollen that it
filled its many channels, overflowing the vast extent of
rice-fields that lay on the east bank. this flood delayed our
departure two weeks; for it swept away our pontoon-bridge at
savannah, and came near drowning john e. smith's division of the
fifteenth corps, with several heavy trains of wagons that were en
route from savannah to pocotaligo by the old causeway.
general slocum had already ferried two of his divisions across
the river, when sister's ferry, about forty miles above savannah,
was selected for the passage of the rest of his wing and of
kilpatrick's cavalry. the troops were in motion for that point
before i quitted savannah, and captain s. b. luce, united states
navy, had reported to me with a gunboat (the pontiac) and a couple
of transports, which i requested him to use in protecting sister's
ferry during the passage of slocum's wing, and to facilitate the
passage of the troops all he could. the utmost activity prevailed
at all points, but it was manifest we could not get off much before
the st day of february; so i determined to go in person to
pocotaligo, and there act as though we were bound for charleston.
on the th of january i started from beaufort with a part of my
staff, leaving the rest to follow at leisure, rode across the
island to a pontoon-bridge that spanned the channel between it and
the main-land, and thence rode by garden's corners to a plantation
not far from pocotaligo, occupied by general blair. there we found
a house, with a majestic avenue of live-oaks, whose limbs had been
cut away by the troops for firewood, and desolation marked one of
those splendid south carolina estates where the proprietors
formerly had dispensed a hospitality that distinguished the old
regime of that proud state. i slept on the floor of the house, but
the night was so bitter cold that i got up by the fire several
times, and when it burned low i rekindled it with an old
mantel-clock and the wreck of a bedstead which stood in a corner of
the room--the only act of vandalism that i recall done by myself
personally during the war.
the next morning i rode to pocotaligo, and thence reconnoitred
our entire line down to coosawhatchie. pocotaligo fort was on low,
alluvial ground, and near it began the sandy pine-land which
connected with the firm ground extending inland, constituting the
chief reason for its capture at the very first stage of the
campaign. hatch's division was ordered to that point from
coosawhatchie, and the whole of howard's right wing was brought
near by, ready to start by the st of february. i also reconnoitred
the point of the salkiehatchie river, where the charleston railroad
crossed it, found the bridge protected by a rebel battery on the
farther side, and could see a few men about it; but the stream
itself was absolutely impassable, for the whole bottom was
overflowed by its swollen waters to the breadth of a full mile.
nevertheless, force's and mower's divisions of the seventeenth
corps were kept active, seemingly with the intention to cross over
in the direction of charleston, and thus to keep up the delusion
that that city was our immediate "objective." meantime, i had
reports from general slocum of the terrible difficulties he had
encountered about sister's ferry, where the savannah river was
reported nearly three miles wide, and it seemed for a time almost
impossible for him to span it at all with his frail pontoons. about
this time (january th), the weather cleared away bright and cold,
and i inferred that the river would soon run down, and enable
slocum to pass the river before february st. one of the divisions
of the fifteenth corps (corse's) had also been cut off by the loss
of the pontoon-bridge at savannah, so that general slocum had with
him, not only his own two corps, but corse's division and
kilpatrick's cavalry, without which it was not prudent for me to
inaugurate the campaign. we therefore rested quietly about
pocotaligo, collecting stores and making final preparations, until
the st of february, when i learned that the cavalry and two
divisions of the twentieth corps were fairly across the river, and
then gave the necessary orders for the march northward.
before closing this chapter, i will add a few original letters
that bear directly on the subject, and tend to illustrate it:
washington, d. c. january , .
major-general w. t. sherman, commanding military division of the
mississippi.
general: your letters brought by general barnard were received at
city point, and read with interest. not having them with me,
however, i cannot say that in this i will be able to satisfy you on
all points of recommendation. as i arrived here at  p.m., and must
leave at  p.m., having in the mean time spent over three hours
with the secretary and general halleck, i must be brief. before
your last request to have thomas make a campaign into the heart of
alabama, i had ordered schofield to annapolis, maryland, with his
corps. the advance (six thousand) will reach the seaboard by the
d, the remainder following as rapidly as railroad transportation
can be procured from cincinnati. the corps numbers over twenty-one
thousand men.
thomas is still left with a sufficient force, surplus to go to
selma under an energetic leader. he has been telegraphed to, to
know whether he could go, and, if so, by which of several routes he
would select. no reply is yet received. canby has been ordered to
set offensively from the seacoast to the interior, toward
montgomery and selma. thomas's forces will move from the north at
an early day, or some of his troops will be sent to canby. without
further reenforcement canby will have a moving column of twenty
thousand men.
fort fisher, you are aware, has been captured. we have a force
there of eight thousand effective. at newbern about half the
number. it is rumored, through deserters, that wilmington also has
fallen. i am inclined to believe the rumor, because on the th we
knew the enemy were blowing up their works about fort caswell, and
that on the th terry moved on wilmington.
if wilmington is captured, schofield will go there. if not, he will
be sent to newbern. in either event, all the surplus forces at the
two points will move to the interior, toward goldsboro', in
cooperation with your movements. from either point, railroad
communications can be run out, there being here abundance of
rolling-stock suited to the gauge of those roads.
there have been about sixteen thousand men sent from lee's army
south. of these, you will have fourteen thousand against you, if
wilmington is not held by the enemy, casualties at fort fisher
having overtaken about two thousand.
all other troops are subject to your orders as you come in
communication with them. they will be so instructed. from about
richmond i will watch lee closely, and if he detaches many men, or
attempts to evacuate, will pitch in. in the meantime, should you be
brought to a halt anywhere, i can send two corps of thirty thousand
effective men to your support, from the troops about
richmond.
to resume: canby is ordered to operate to the interior from the
gulf. a. j. smith may go from the north, but i think it doubtful. a
force of twenty-eight or thirty thousand will cooperate with you
from newbern or wilmington, or both. you can call for
reenforcements.
this will be handed you by captain hudson, of my staff, who will
return with any message you may have for me. if there is any thing
i can do for you in the way of having supplies on shipboard, at any
point on the seacoast, ready for you, let me know it.
yours truly,
u. s. grant, lieutenant-general.
in the field, pocotaligo, south carolina, january , .
lieutenant-general u. s. grant, city point, virginia.
dear general: captain hudson has this moment arrived with your
letter of january st, which i have read with interest.
the capture of fort fisher has a most important bearing on my
campaign, and i rejoice in it for many reasons, because of its
intrinsic importance, and because it gives me another point of
security on the seaboard. i hope general terry will follow it up by
the capture of wilmington, although i do not look for it, from
admiral porter's dispatch to me. i rejoice that terry was not a
west-pointer, that he belonged to your army, and that he had the
same troops with which butler feared to make the attempt.
admiral dahlgren, whose fleet is reenforced by some more ironclads,
wants to make an assault a la fisher on fort moultrie, but i
withhold my consent, for the reason that the capture of all
sullivan's island is not conclusive as to charleston; the capture
of james island would be, but all pronounce that impossible at this
time. therefore, i am moving (as hitherto designed) for the
railroad west of branchville, then will swing across to orangeburg,
which will interpose my army between charleston and the interior.
contemporaneous with this, foster will demonstrate up the edisto,
and afterward make a lodgment at bull's bay, and occupy the common
road which leads from mount pleasant toward georgetown. when i get
to columbia, i think i shall move straight for goldsboro', via
fayetteville. by this circuit i cut all roads, and devastate the
land; and the forces along the coast, commanded by foster, will
follow my movement, taking any thing the enemy lets go, or so
occupy his attention that he cannot detach all his forces against
me. i feel sure of getting wilmington, and may be charleston, and
being at goldsboro', with its railroads finished back to morehead
city and wilmington, i can easily take raleigh, when it seems that
lee must come out. if schofield comes to beaufort, he should be
pushed out to kinston, on the neuse, and may be goldsboro' (or,
rather, a point on the wilmington road, south of goldsboro'). it is
not necessary to storm goldsboro', because it is in a distant
region, of no importance in itself, and, if its garrison is forced
to draw supplies from its north, it, will be eating up the same
stores on which lee depends for his command.
i have no doubt hood will bring his army to augusta. canby and
thomas should penetrate alabama as far as possible, to keep
employed at least a part of hood's army; or, what would accomplish
the same thing, thomas might reoccupy the railroad from chattanooga
forward to the etowah, viz., rome, kingston, and allatoona, thereby
threatening georgia. i know that the georgia troops are
disaffected. at savannah i met delegates from several counties of
the southwest, who manifested a decidedly hostile spirit to the
confederate cause. i nursed the feeling as far as possible, and
instructed grower to keep it up.
my left wing must now be at sister's ferry, crossing the savannah
river to the east bank. slocum has orders to be at robertsville
to-morrow, prepared to move on barnwell. howard is here, all ready
to start for the augusta railroad at midway.
we find the enemy on the east aide of the salkiehatchie, and
cavalry in our front; but all give ground on our approach, and seem
to be merely watching us. if we start on tuesday, in one week we
shall be near orangeburg, having broken up the augusta road from
the edisto westward twenty or twenty-five miles. i will be sure
that every rail is twisted. should we encounter too much opposition
near orangeburg, then i will for a time neglect that branch, and
rapidly move on columbia, and fill up the triangle formed by the
congaree and wateree (tributaries of the santee), breaking up that
great centre of the carolina roads. up to that point i feel full
confidence, but from there may have to manoeuvre some, and will be
guided by the questions of weather and supplies.
you remember we had fine weather last february for our meridian
trip, and my memory of the weather at charleston is, that february
is usually a fine month. before the march storms come we should be
within striking distance of the coast. the months of april and may
will be the best for operations from goldsboro' to raleigh and the
roanoke. you may rest assured that i will keep my troops well in
hand, and, if i get worsted, will aim to make the enemy pay so
dearly that you will have less to do. i know that this trip is
necessary; it must be made sooner or later; i am on time, and in
the right position for it. my army is large enough for the purpose,
and i ask no reinforcement, but simply wish the utmost activity to
be kept up at all other points, so that concentration against me
may not be universal.
i suspect that jeff. davis will move heaven and earth to catch me,
for success to this column is fatal to his dream of empire.
richmond is not more vital to his cause than columbia and the heart
of south carolina.
if thomas will not move on selma, order him to occupy rome,
kingston, and allatoona, and again threaten georgia in the
direction of athena.
i think the "poor white trash" of the south are falling out of
their ranks by sickness, desertion, and every available means; but
there is a large class of vindictive southerners who will fight to
the last. the squabbles in richmond, the howls in charleston, and
the disintegration elsewhere, are all good omens for us; we must
not relax one iota, but, on the contrary, pile up our efforts: i
world, ere this, have been off, but we had terrific rains, which
caught us in motion, and nearly drowned some of the troops in the
rice-fields of the savannah, swept away our causeway (which had
been carefully corduroyed), and made the swamps hereabout mere
lakes of slimy mud. the weather is now good, and i have the army on
terra firma. supplies, too, came for a long time by daily driblets
instead of in bulk; this is now all remedied, and i hope to start
on tuesday.
i will issue instructions to general foster, based on the
reenforcements of north carolina; but if schofield comes, you had
better relieve foster, who cannot take the field, and needs an
operation on his leg. let schofield take command, with his
headquarters at beaufort, north carolina, and with orders to secure
goldsboro' (with its railroad communication back to beaufort and
wilmington). if lee lets us get that position, he is gone up.
i will start with my atlanta army (sixty thousand), supplied as
before, depending on the country for all food in excess of thirty
days. i will have less cattle on the hoof, but i hear of hogs,
cows, and calves, in barnwell and the colombia districts. even here
we have found some forage. of course, the enemy will carry off and
destroy some forage, but i will burn the houses where the people
burn their forage, and they will get tired of it.
i must risk hood, and trust to you to hold lee or be on his heels
if he comes south. i observe that the enemy has some respect for my
name, for they gave up pocotaligo without a fight when they heard
that the attacking force belonged to my army. i will try and keep
up that feeling, which is a real power. with respect, your
friend,
w. t. sherman, major-general commanding.
p. s.--i leave my chief-quartermaster and commissary behind to
follow coastwise.
[dispatch no. .]
savannah river, january , .
hon. gideon wells, secretary of the navy.
sir: i have already apprised the department that the army of
general sherman occupied the city of savannah on the st of
december.
the rebel army, hardly respectable in numbers or condition, escaped
by crossing the river and taking the union causeway toward the
railroad.
i have walked about the city several times, and can affirm that its
tranquillity is undisturbed. the union soldiers who are stationed
within its limits are as orderly as if they were in new york or
boston.... one effect of the march of general sherman through
georgia has been to satisfy the people that their credulity has
been imposed upon by the lying assertions of the rebel government,
affirming the inability of the united states government to
withstand the armies of rebeldom. they have seen the old flag of
the united states carried by its victorious legions through their
state, almost unopposed, and placed in their principal city without
a blow.
since the occupation of the city general sherman has been occupied
in making arrangements for its security after he leaves it for the
march that he meditates. my attention has been directed to such
measures of cooperation as the number and quality of my force
permit.
on the d i arrived here from charleston, whither, as i stated in
my dispatch of the th of december, i had gone in consequence of
information from the senior officer there that the rebels
contemplated issuing from the harbor, and his request for my
presence. having placed a force there of seven monitors, sufficient
to meet each an emergency, and not perceiving any sign of the
expected raid, i returned to savannah, to keep in communication
with general sherman and be ready to render any assistance that
might be desired. general sherman has fully informed me of his
plans, and, so far as my means permit, they shall not lack
assistance by water.
on the d the transfer of the right wing to beaufort was began, and
the only suitable vessel i had at hand (the harvest moon) was sent
to thunderbolt to receive the first embarkation. this took place
about  p.m., and was witnessed by general sherman and general
bernard (united states engineers) and myself. the pontiac is
ordered around to assist, and the army transports also followed the
first move by the harvest moon.
i could not help remarking the unbroken silence that prevailed in
the large array of troops; not a voice was to be heard, as they
gathered in masses on the bluff to look at the vessels. the notes
of a solitary bugle alone came from their midst.
general barnard made a brief visit to one of the rebel works
(cansten's bluff) that dominated this water-course--the best
approach of the kind to savannah.
i am collecting data that will fully exhibit to the department the
powerful character of the defenses of the city and its approaches.
general sherman will not retain the extended limits they embrace.
but will contract the line very much.
general foster still holds the position near the tullifinny. with
his concurrence i have detached the fleet brigade, and the men
belonging to it have returned to their vessels. the excellent
service performed by this detachment has fully realized my wishes,
and exemplified the efficiency of the organization--infantry and
light artillery handled as skirmishers. the howitzers were always
landed as quickly as the men, and were brought into action before
the light pieces of the land-service could be got ashore.
i regret very much that the reduced complements of the vessels
prevent me from maintaining the force in constant organization.
with three hundred more marines and five hundred seamen i could
frequently operate to great advantage, at the present time, when
the attention of the rebels is so engrossed by general
sherman.
it is said that they have a force at hardeeville, the pickets of
which were retained on the union causeway until a few days since,
when some of our troops crossed the river and pushed them back.
concurrently with this, i caused the sonoma to anchor so as to
sweep the ground in the direction of the causeway.
the transfer of the right-wing (thirty thousand men) to beaufort
will so imperil the rebel force at hardeeville that it will be cut
off or dispersed, if not moved in season.
meanwhile i will send the dai-ching to st. helena, to meet any want
that may arise in that quarter, while the mingo and pontiac will be
ready to act from broad river.
the general route of the army will be northward; but the exact
direction must be decided more or less by circumstances which it
may not be possible to foresee....
my cooperation will be confined to assistance in attacking
charleston, or in establishing communication at georgetown, in case
the army pushes on without attacking charleston, and time alone
will show which of these will eventuate.
the weather of the winter first, and the condition of the ground in
spring, would permit little advantage to be derived from the
presence of the army at richmond until the middle of may. so that
general sherman has no reason to move in haste, but can choose such
objects as he prefers, and take as much time as their attainment
may demand. the department will learn the objects in view of
general sherman more precisely from a letter addressed by him to
general halleck, which he read to me a few days since.
i have the honor to be, very respectfully, your obedient
servant,
rear-admiral, commanding south-atlantic blockading-squadron.
in the field, pocotaligo, south carolina, january , .
major-general j. g. foster, commanding department of the
south.
general: i have just received dispatches from general grant,
stating that schofield's corps (the twenty-third), twenty-one
thousand strong, is ordered east from tennessee, and will be sent
to beaufort, north carolina. that is well; i want that force to
secure a point on the railroad about goldsboro', and then to build
the railroad out to that point. if goldsboro' be too strong to
carry by a rapid movement, then a point near the neuse, south of
goldsboro', will answer, but the bridge and position about kinston,
should be held and fortified strong. the movement should be masked
by the troops already at newbern. please notify general palmer that
these troops are coming, and to be prepared to receive them.
major-general schofield will command in person, and is admirably
adapted for the work. if it is possible, i want him to secure
goldsboro', with the railroad back to morehead city and wilmington.
as soon as general schofield reaches fort macon, have him to meet
some one of your staff, to explain in full the details of the
situation of affairs with me; and you can give him the chief
command of all troops at cape fear and in north carolina. if he
finds the enemy has all turned south against me, he need not
follow, but turn his attention against raleigh; if he can secure
goldsboro' and wilmington, it will be as much as i expect before i
have passed the santee. send him all detachments of men that have
come to join my army. they can be so organized and officered as to
be efficient, for they are nearly all old soldiers who have been
detached or on furlough. until i pass the santee, you can better
use these detachments at bull's bay, georgetown, etc.
i will instruct general mccallum, of the railroad department, to
take his men up to beaufort, north carolina, and employ them on the
road out. i do not know that he can use them on any road here. i
did instruct him, while awaiting information from north carolina,
to have them build a good trestle-bridge across port royal ferry;
but i now suppose the pontoon-bridge will do. if you move the
pontoons, be sure to make a good road out to garden's corners, and
mark it with sign-boards--obstructing the old road, so that, should
i send back any detachments, they would not be misled.
i prefer that hatch's force should not be materially weakened until
i am near columbia, when you may be governed by the situation of
affairs about charleston. if you can break the railroad between
this and charleston, then this force could be reduced.
i am, with respect, etc.,
w. t. sherman, major-general commanding.
in the field, pocotaligo, south carolina, january , .
hon. edwin m. stanton, secretary of war, washington, d. c.
sir: when you left savannah a few days ago, you forgot the map
which general geary had prepared for you, showing the route by
which his division entered the city of savannah, being the first
troops to occupy that city. i now send it to you.
i avail myself of the opportunity also to inclose you copies of all
my official orders touching trade and intercourse with the people
of georgia, as well as for the establishment of the negro
settlements.
delegations of the people of georgia continue to come in, and i am
satisfied that, by judicious handling and by a little respect shown
to their prejudices, we can create a schism in jeff. davis's
dominions. all that i have conversed with realize the truth that
slavery as an institution is defunct, and the only questions that
remain are what disposition shall be made of the negroes
themselves. i confess myself unable to offer a complete solution
for these questions, and prefer to leave it to the slower
operations of time. we have given the initiative, and can afford to
await the working of the experiment.
as to trade-matters, i also think it is to our interest to keep the
southern people somewhat dependent on the articles of commerce to
which they have hitherto been accustomed. general grover is now
here, and will, i think, be able to handle this matter judiciously,
and may gradually relax, and invite cotton to come in in large
quantities. but at first we should manifest no undue anxiety on
that score; for the rebels would at once make use of it as a power
against us. we should assume, a tone of perfect contempt for cotton
and every thing else in comparison with the great object of the
war--the restoration of the union, with all its rights and power.
it the rebels burn cotton as a war measure, they simply play into
our hands by taking away the only product of value they have to
exchange in foreign ports for war-ships and munitions. by such a
course, also, they alienate the feelings of a large class of small
farmers who look to their little parcels of cotton to exchange for
food and clothing for their families. i hope the government will
not manifest too much anxiety to obtain cotton in large quantities,
and especially that the president will not indorse the contracts
for the purchase of large quantities of cotton. several contracts,
involving from six to ten thousand bales, indorsed by mr. lincoln,
have been shown me, but were not in such a form as to amount to an
order to compel me to facilitate their execution.
as to treasury agents, and agents to take charge of confiscated and
abandoned property, whose salaries depend on their fees, i can only
say that, as a general rule, they are mischievous and disturbing
elements to a military government, and it is almost impossible for
us to study the law and regulations so as to understand fully their
powers and duties. i rather think the quartermaster's department of
the army could better fulfill all their duties and accomplish all
that is aimed at by the law. yet on this subject i will leave
generals foster and grover to do the best they can.
i am, with great respect, your obedient servant,
w. t. sherman, major-general commanding.
in the field, pocotaligo, south carolina, january , .
hon. edwin m. stanton, secretary of war, washington, d. c.
sir: i have just received from lieutenant-general grant a copy of
that part of your telegram to him of december th relating to
cotton, a copy of which has been immediately furnished to general
easton, chief-quartermaster, who will be strictly governed by
it.
i had already been approached by all the consuls and half the
people of savannah on this cotton question, and my invariable
answer was that all the cotton in savannah was prize of war,
belonged to the united states, and nobody should recover a bale of
it with my consent; that, as cotton had been one of the chief
causes of this war, it should help to pay its expenses; that all
cotton became tainted with treason from the hour the first act of
hostility was committed against the united states some time in
december, ; and that no bill of sale subsequent to that date
could convey title.
my orders were that an officer of the quartermaster's department,
united states army, might furnish the holder, agent, or attorney, a
mere certificate of the fact of seizure, with description of the
bales' marks, etc., the cotton then to be turned over to the agent
of the treasury department, to be shipped to new york for sale.
but, since the receipt of your dispatch, i have ordered general
easton to make the shipment himself to the quartermaster at new
york, where you can dispose of it at pleasure. i do not think the
treasury department ought to bother itself with the prizes or
captures of war.
mr. barclay, former consul at new york, representing mr. molyneux,
former consul here, but absent a long time, called on me with
reference to cotton claimed by english subjects. he seemed amazed
when i told him i should pay no respect to consular certificates,
that in no event would i treat an english subject with more favor
than one of our own deluded citizens, and that for my part i was
unwilling to fight for cotton for the benefit of englishmen openly
engaged in smuggling arms and instruments of war to kill us; that,
on the contrary, it would afford me great satisfaction to conduct
my army to nassau, and wipe out that nest of pirates. i explained
to him, however, that i was not a diplomatic agent of the general
government of the united states, but that my opinion, so frankly
expressed, was that of a soldier, which it would be well for him to
heed. it appeared, also, that he owned a plantation on the line of
investment of savannah, which, of course, was pillaged, and for
which he expected me to give some certificate entitling him to
indemnification, which i declined emphatically.
i have adopted in savannah rules concerning property--severe but
just--founded upon the laws of nations and the practice of
civilized governments, and am clearly of opinion that we should
claim all the belligerent rights over conquered countries, that the
people may realize the truth that war is no child's play.
i embrace in this a copy of a letter, dated december , , in
answer to one from solomon cohen (a rich lawyer) to general blair,
his personal friend, as follows:
major-general f. p. blair, commanding seventeenth army corps.
general: your note, inclosing mr. cohen's of this date, is
received, and i answer frankly through you his inquiries.
. no one can practise law as an attorney in the united states
without acknowledging the supremacy of our government. if i am not
in error, an attorney is as much an officer of the court as the
clerk, and it would be a novel thing in a government to have a
court to administer law which denied the supremacy of the
government itself.
. no one will be allowed the privileges of a merchant, or, rather,
to trade is a privilege which no one should seek of the government
without in like manner acknowledging its supremacy.
. if mr. cohen remains in savannah as a denizen, his property,
real and personal, will not be disturbed unless its temporary use
be necessary for the military authorities of the city. the title to
property will not be disturbed in any event, until adjudicated by
the courts of the united states.
. if mr. cohen leaves savannah under my special order no. , it
is a public acknowledgment that he "adheres to the enemies of the
united states," and all his property becomes forfeited to the
united states. but, as a matter of favor, he will be allowed to
carry with him clothing and furniture for the use of himself, his
family, and servants, and will be trans ported within the enemy's
lines, but not by way of port royal.
these rules will apply to all parties, and from them no exception
will be made.
i have the honor to be, general, your obedient servant,
w. t. sherman, major-general.
this letter was in answer to specific inquiries; it is clear, and
covers all the points, and, should i leave before my orders are
executed, i will endeavor to impress upon my successor, general
foster, their wisdom and propriety.
i hope the course i have taken in these matters will meet your
approbation, and that the president will not refund to parties
claiming cotton or other property, without the strongest evidence
of loyalty and friendship on the part of the claimant, or unless
some other positive end is to be gained.
i am, with great respect, your obedient servant,
w. t. sherman, major-general commanding.
on the st day of february, as before explained, the army
designed for the active campaign from savannah northward was
composed of two wings, commanded respectively by major-generals
howard and slocum, and was substantially the same that had marched
from atlanta to savannah. the same general orders were in force,
and this campaign may properly be classed as a continuance of the
former.
the right wing, less corse's division, fifteenth corps, was
grouped at or near pocotaligo, south carolina, with its wagons
filled with food, ammunition, and forage, all ready to start, and
only waiting for the left wing, which was detained by the flood in
the savannah river. it was composed as follows:
fifteenth corps, major-general john a. logan.
first division, brigadier-general charles r. woods; second
division, major-general w. b. hazen; third division,
brigadier-general john e. smith; fourth division, brigadier-general
john m. corse. artillery brigade, eighteen guns, lieutenant-colonel
w. h. ross, first michigan artillery.
seventeenth. corps, major-general frank p. blair, jr.
first division, major-general joseph a. mower; second division,
brigadier-general m. f. force; fourth division, brigadier-general
giles a. smith. artillery brigade, fourteen guns, major a. c.
waterhouse, first illinois artillery.
the left wing, with corse's division and kilpatrick's cavalry,
was at and near sister's ferry, forty miles above the city of
savannah, engaged in crossing the river, then much swollen. it was
composed as follows:
fourteenth corps, major-general jeff. c. davis.
first division, brigadier-general w. p. carlin; second division,
brigadier-general john d. morgan; third division, brigadier-general
a. baird. artillery brigade, sixteen guns, major charles
houghtaling, first illinois artillery.
twentieth corps, brigadier-general a. s. williams.
first division, brigadier-general n. i. jackson; second
division, brigadier-general j. w. geary; third division,
brigadier-general w. t. ward. artillery brigade, sixteen gnus,
major j. a. reynolds, first new york artillery.
cavalry division, brigadier-general judson kilpatrick.
first brigade, colonel t. j. jordan, ninth pennsylvania cavalry;
second brigade, colonel s. d. atkins, ninety-second illinois vol.;
third brigade, colonel george e. spencer, first alabama cavalry.
one battery of four guns.
the actual strength of the army, as given in the following
official tabular statements, was at the time sixty thousand and
seventy-nine men, and sixty-eight guns. the trains were made up of
about twenty-five hundred wagons, with six mules to each wagon, and
about six hundred ambulances, with two horses each. the contents of
the wagons embraced an ample supply of ammunition for a great
battle; forage for about seven days, and provisions for twenty
days, mostly of bread, sugar, coffee, and salt, depending largely
for fresh meat on beeves driven on the hoof and such cattle, hogs,
and poultry, as we expected to gather along our line of march.
february .
march .
april .
april 
the enemy occupied the cities of charleston and augusta, with
garrisons capable of making a respectable if not successful
defense, but utterly unable to meet our veteran columns in the open
field. to resist or delay our progress north, general wheeler had
his division of cavalry (reduced to the size of a brigade by his
hard and persistent fighting ever since the beginning of the
atlanta campaign), and general wade hampton had been dispatched
from the army of virginia to his native state of south carolina,
with a great flourish of trumpets, and extraordinary powers to
raise men, money, and horses, with which "to stay the progress of
the invader," and "to punish us for our insolent attempt to invade
the glorious state of south carolina!" he was supposed at the time
to have, at and near columbia, two small divisions of cavalry
commanded by himself and general butler.
of course, i had a species of contempt for these scattered and
inconsiderable forces, knew that they could hardly delay us an
hour; and the only serious question that occurred to me was, would
general lee sit down in richmond (besieged by general grant), and
permit us, almost unopposed, to pass through the states of south
and north carolina, cutting off and consuming the very supplies on
which he depended to feed his army in virginia, or would he make an
effort to escape from general grant, and endeavor to catch us
inland somewhere between columbia and raleigh? i knew full well at
the time that the broken fragments of hood's army (which had
escaped from tennessee) were being hurried rapidly across georgia,
by augusta, to make junction in my front; estimating them at the
maximum twenty-five thousand men, and hardee's, wheeler's, and
hampton's forces at fifteen thousand, made forty thousand; which,
if handled with spirit and energy, would constitute a formidable
force, and might make the passage of such rivers as the santee and
cape fear a difficult undertaking. therefore, i took all possible
precautions, and arranged with admiral dahlgren and general foster
to watch our progress inland by all the means possible, and to
provide for us points of security along the coast; as, at bull's
bay, georgetown, and the mouth of cape fear river. still, it was
extremely desirable in one march to reach goldsboro' in the state
of north carolina (distant four hundred and twenty-five miles), a
point of great convenience for ulterior operations, by reason of
the two railroads which meet there, coming from the seacoast at
wilmington and newbern. before leaving savannah i had sent to
newbern colonel w. w. wright, of the engineers, with orders to look
to these railroads, to collect rolling-stock, and to have the roads
repaired out as far as possible in six weeks--the time estimated as
necessary for us to march that distance.
the question of supplies remained still the one of vital
importance, and i reasoned that we might safely rely on the country
for a considerable quantity of forage and provisions, and that, if
the worst came to the worst, we could live several months on the
mules and horses of our trains. nevertheless, time was equally
material, and the moment i heard that general slocum had finished
his pontoon-bridge at sister's ferry, and that kilpatrick's cavalry
was over the river, i gave the general orders to march, and
instructed all the columns to aim for the south carolina railroad
to the west of branchville, about blackville and midway.
the right wing moved up the salkiehatchie, the seventeenth corps
on the right, with orders on reaching rivers's bridge to cross
over, and the fifteenth corps by hickory hill to beaufort's bridge.
kilpatrick was instructed to march by way of barnwell; corse's
division and the twentieth corps to take such roads as would bring
them into communication with the fifteenth corps about beaufort's
bridge. all these columns started promptly on the st of february.
we encountered wheeler's cavalry, which had obstructed the road by
felling trees, but our men picked these up and threw them aside, so
that this obstruction hardly delayed us an hour. in person i
accompanied the fifteenth corps (general logan) by mcphersonville
and hickory hill, and kept couriers going to and fro to general
slocum with instructions to hurry as much as possible, so as to
make a junction of the whole army on the south carolina railroad
about blackville.
i spent the night of february st at hickory hill post-office,
and that of the d at duck branch post-office, thirty-one miles out
from pocotaligo. on the d the seventeenth corps was opposite
rivers's bridge, and the fifteenth approached beaufort's bridge.
the salkiehatchie was still over its banks, and presented a most
formidable obstacle. the enemy appeared in some force on the
opposite bank, had cut away all the bridges which spanned the many
deep channels of the swollen river, and the only available passage
seemed to be along the narrow causeways which constituted the
common roads. at rivers's bridge generals mower and giles a. smith
led, their heads of column through this swamp, the water up to
their shoulders, crossed over to the pine-land, turned upon the
rebel brigade which defended the passage, and routed it in utter
disorder. it was in this attack that general wager swayne lost his
leg, and he had to be conveyed back to pocotaligo. still, the loss
of life was very small, in proportion to the advantages gained, for
the enemy at once abandoned the whole line of the salkiehatchie,
and the fifteenth corps passed over at beaufort's bridge, without
opposition.
on the th of february i was at beaufort's bridge, by which time
general a. s. williams had got up with five brigades' of the
twentieth corps; i also heard of general kilpatrick's being abreast
of us, at barnwell, and then gave orders for the march straight for
the railroad at midway. i still remained with the fifteenth corps,
which, on the th of february, was five miles from bamberg. as a
matter of course, i expected severe resistance at this railroad,
for its loss would sever all the communications of the enemy in
charleston with those in augusta.
early on the th, in the midst of a rain-storm, we reached the
railroad; almost unopposed, striking it at several points. general
howard told me a good story concerning this, which will bear
repeating: he was with the seventeenth corps, marching straight for
midway, and when about five miles distant he began to deploy the
leading division, so as to be ready for battle. sitting on his
horse by the road-side, while the deployment was making, he saw a
man coming down the road, riding as hard as he could, and as he
approached he recognized him as one of his own "foragers," mounted
on a white horse, with a rope bridle and a blanket for saddle. as
he came near he called out, "hurry up, general; we have got the
railroad!" so, while we, the generals, were proceeding deliberately
to prepare for a serious battle, a parcel of our foragers, in
search of plunder, had got ahead and actually captured the south
carolina railroad, a line of vital importance to the rebel
government.
as soon as we struck the railroad, details of men were set to
work to tear up the rails, to burn the ties and twist the bars.
this was a most important railroad, and i proposed to destroy it
completely for fifty miles, partly to prevent a possibility of its
restoration and partly to utilize the time necessary for general
slocum to get up.
the country thereabouts was very poor, but the inhabitants
mostly remained at home. indeed, they knew not where to go. the
enemy's cavalry had retreated before us, but his infantry was
reported in some strength at branchville, on the farther side of
the edisto; yet on the appearance of a mere squad of our men they
burned their own bridges the very thing i wanted, for we had no use
for them, and they had.
we all remained strung along this railroad till the th of
february--the seventeenth corps on the right, then the fifteenth,
twentieth, and cavalry, at blackville. general slocum reached
blackville that day, with geary's division of the twentieth corps,
and reported the fourteenth corps (general jeff. c. davis's) to be
following by way of barnwell. on the th i rode up to blackville,
where i conferred with generals slocum and kilpatrick, became
satisfied that the whole army would be ready within a day, and
accordingly made orders for the next movement north to columbia,
the right wing to strike orangeburg en route. kilpatrick was
ordered to demonstrate strongly toward aiken, to keep up the
delusion that we might turn to augusta; but he was notified that
columbia was the next objective, and that he should cover the left
flank against wheeler, who hung around it. i wanted to reach
columbia before any part of hood's army could possibly get there.
some of them were reported as having reached augusta, under the
command of general dick taylor.
having sufficiently damaged the railroad, and effected the
junction of the entire army, the general march was resumed on the
th, each corps crossing the south edisto by separate bridges,
with orders to pause on the road leading from orangeberg to
augusta, till it was certain that the seventeenth corps had got
possession of orangeburg. this place was simply important as its
occupation would sever the communications between charleston and
columbia. all the heads of column reached this road, known as the
edgefield road, during the th, and the seventeenth corps turned
to the right, against orangeburg. when i reached the head of column
opposite orangeburg, i found giles a. smith's division halted, with
a battery unlimbered, exchanging shots with a party on the opposite
side of the edisto. he reported that the bridge was gone, and that
the river was deep and impassable. i then directed general blair to
send a strong division below the town, some four or five miles, to
effect a crossing there. he laid his pontoon-bridge, but the bottom
on the other side was overflowed, and the men had to wade through
it, in places as deep as their waists. i was with this division at
the time, on foot, trying to pick my way across the overflowed
bottom; but, as soon as the head of column reached the sand-hills,
i knew that the enemy would not long remain in orangeburg, and
accordingly returned to my horse, on the west bank, and rode
rapidly up to where i had left giles a. smith. i found him in
possession of the broken bridge, abreast of the town, which he was
repairing, and i was among the first to cross over and enter the
town. by and before the time either force's or giles a. smith's
skirmishers entered the place, several stores were on fire, and i
am sure that some of the towns-people told me that a jew merchant
had set fire to his own cotton and store, and from this the fire
had spread. this, however, was soon put out, and the seventeenth
corps (general blair) occupied the place during that night. i
remember to have visited a large hospital, on the hill near the
railroad depot, which was occupied by the orphan children who had
been removed from the asylum in charleston. we gave them
protection, and, i think, some provisions. the railroad and depot
were destroyed by order, and no doubt a good deal of cotton was
burned, for we all regarded cotton as hostile property, a thing to
be destroyed. general blair was ordered to break up this railroad,
forward to the point where it crossed the santee, and then to turn
for columbia. on the morning of the th i again joined the
fifteenth corps, which crossed the north edisto by snilling's
bridge, and moved straight for columbia, around the head of caw-caw
swamp. orders were sent to all the columns to turn for columbia,
where it was supposed the enemy had concentrated all the men they
could from charleston, augusta, and even from virginia. that night
i was with the fifteenth corps, twenty-one miles from columbia,
where my aide, colonel audenried, picked up a rebel officer on the
road, who, supposing him to be of the same service with himself,
answered all his questions frankly, and revealed the truth that
there was nothing in columbia except hampton's cavalry. the fact
was, that general hardee, in charleston, took it for granted that
we were after charleston; the rebel troops in augusta supposed they
were "our objective;" so they abandoned poor columbia to the care
of hampton's cavalry, which was confused by the rumors that poured
in on it, so that both beauregard and wade hampton, who were in
columbia, seem to have lost their heads.
on the th the head of the fifteenth corps, charles r. woods's
division, approached the little congaree, a broad, deep stream,
tributary to the main congaree; six or eight miles below columbia.
on the opposite side of this stream was a newly-constructed fort,
and on our side--a wide extent of old cotton-fields, which, had
been overflowed, and was covered with a deep slime. general woods
had deployed his leading brigade, which was skirmishing forward,
but he reported that the bridge was gone, and that a considerable
force of the enemy was on the other side. i directed general howard
or logan to send a brigade by a circuit to the left, to see if this
stream could not be crossed higher up, but at the same time knew
that general slocum's route world bring him to colombia behind this
stream, and that his approach would uncover it. therefore, there
was no need of exposing much life. the brigade, however, found
means to cross the little congaree, and thus uncovered the passage
by the main road, so that general woods's skirmishers at once
passed over, and a party was set to work to repair the bridge,
which occupied less than an hour, when i passed over with my whole
staff. i found the new fort unfinished and unoccupied, but from its
parapet could see over some old fields bounded to the north and
west by hills skirted with timber. there was a plantation to our
left, about half a mile, and on the edge of the timber was drawn up
a force of rebel cavalry of about a regiment, which advanced, and
charged upon some, of our foragers, who were plundering the
plantation; my aide, colonel audenried, who had ridden forward,
came back somewhat hurt and bruised, for, observing this charge of
cavalry, he had turned for us, and his horse fell with him in
attempting to leap a ditch. general woods's skirmish-line met this
charge of cavalry, and drove it back into the woods and beyond. we
remained on that ground during the night of the th, and i camped
on the nearest dry ground behind the little congaree, where on the
next morning were made the written' orders for the government of
the troops while occupying columbia. these are dated february ,
, in these words:
general howard will cross the saluda and broad rivers as near
their mouths as possible, occupy columbia, destroy the public
buildings, railroad property, manufacturing and machine shops; but
will spare libraries, asylums, and private dwellings. he will then
move to winnsboro', destroying en route utterly that section of the
railroad. he will also cause all bridges, trestles, water-tanks,
and depots on the railroad back to the wateree to be burned,
switches broken, and such other destruction as he can find time to
accomplish consistent with proper celerity.
these instructions were embraced in general order no. , which
prescribed the routes of march for the several columns as far as
fayetteville, north carolina, and is conclusive that i then
regarded columbia as simply one point on our general route of
march, and not as an important conquest.
during the th of february the fifteenth corps reached the
point opposite columbia, and pushed on for the saluda factory three
miles above, crossed that stream, and the head of column reached
broad river just in time to find its bridge in flames, butler's
cavalry having just passed over into columbia. the head of slocum's
column also reached the point opposite columbia the same morning,
but the bulk of his army was back at lexington. i reached this
place early in the morning of the th, met general slocum there;
and explained to him the purport of general order no. , which
contemplated the passage of his army across broad river at alston,
fifteen miles above columbia. riding down to the river-bank, i saw
the wreck of the large bridge which had been burned by the enemy,
with its many stone piers still standing, but the superstructure
gone. across the congaree river lay the city of columbia, in plain,
easy view. i could see the unfinished state-house, a handsome
granite structure, and the ruins of the railroad depot, which were
still smouldering. occasionally a few citizens or cavalry could be
seen running across the streets, and quite a number of negroes were
seemingly busy in carrying off bags of grain or meal, which were
piled up near the burned depot.
captain de gres had a section of his twenty-pound parrott guns
unlimbered, firing into the town. i asked him what he was firing
for; he said he could see some rebel cavalry occasionally at the
intersections of the streets, and he had an idea that there was a
large force of infantry concealed on the opposite bank, lying low,
in case we should attempt to cross over directly into the town. i
instructed him not to fire any more into the town, but consented to
his bursting a few shells near the depot, to scare away the negroes
who were appropriating the bags of corn and meal which we wanted,
also to fire three shots at the unoccupied state-house. i stood by
and saw these fired, and then all firing ceased. although this
matter of firing into columbia has been the subject of much abuse
and investigation, i have yet to hear of any single person having
been killed in columbia by our cannon. on the other hand, the night
before, when woods's division was in camp in the open fields at
little congaree, it was shelled all night by a rebel battery from
the other aide of the river. this provoked me much at the time, for
it was wanton mischief, as generals beauregard and hampton must
have been convinced that they could not prevent our entrance into
columbia. i have always contended that i would have been justified
in retaliating for this unnecessary act of war, but did not, though
i always characterized it as it deserved.
the night of the th i camped near an old prison bivouac
opposite columbia, known to our prisoners of war as "camp sorghum,"
where remained the mud-hovels and holes in the ground which our
prisoners had made to shelter themselves from the winter's cold and
the summer's heat. the fifteenth corps was then ahead, reaching to
broad river, about four miles above columbia; the seventeenth corps
was behind, on the river-bank opposite columbia; and the left wing
and cavalry had turned north toward alston.
the next morning, viz., february th, i rode to the head of
general howard's column, and found that during the night he had
ferried stone's brigade of woods's division of the fifteenth corps
across by rafts made of the pontoons, and that brigade was then
deployed on the opposite bank to cover the construction of a
pontoon-bridge nearly finished.
i sat with general howard on a log, watching the men lay this
bridge; and about  or  a.m. a messenger came from colonel stone
on the other aide, saying that the mayor of columbia had come out
of the city to surrender the place, and asking for orders. i simply
remarked to general howard that he had his orders, to let colonel
stone go on into the city, and that we would follow as soon as the
bridge was ready. by this same messenger i received a note in
pencil from the lady superioress of a convent or school in
columbia, in which she claimed to have been a teacher in a convent
in brown county, ohio, at the time my daughter minnie was a pupil
there, and therefore asking special protection. my recollection is,
that i gave the note to my brother-in-law, colonel ewing, then
inspector-general on my staff, with instructions to see this lady,
and assure her that we contemplated no destruction of any private
property in columbia at all.
as soon as the bridge was done, i led my horse over it, followed
by my whole staff. general howard accompanied me with his, and
general logan was next in order, followed by general c. r. woods,
and the whole of the fifteenth corps. ascending the hill, we soon
emerged into a broad road leading into columbia, between old fields
of corn and cotton, and, entering the city, we found seemingly all
its population, white and black, in the streets. a high and
boisterous wind was prevailing from the north, and flakes of cotton
were flying about in the air and lodging in the limbs of the trees,
reminding us of a northern snow-storm. near the market-square we
found stone's brigade halted, with arms stacked, and a large detail
of his men, along with some citizens, engaged with an old
fire-engine, trying to put out the fire in a long pile of burning
cotton-bales, which i was told had been fired by the rebel cavalry
on withdrawing from the city that morning. i know that, to avoid
this row of burning cotton-bales, i had to ride my horse on the
sidewalk. in the market-square had collected a large crowd of
whites and blacks, among whom was the mayor of the city, dr.
goodwin, quite a respectable old gentleman, who was extremely
anxious to protect the interests of the citizens. he was on foot,
and i on horseback, and it is probable i told him then not to be
uneasy, that we did not intend to stay long, and had no purpose to
injure the private citizens or private property. about this time i
noticed several men trying to get through the crowd to speak with
me, and called to some black people to make room for them; when
they reached me, they explained that they were officers of our
army, who had been prisoners, had escaped from the rebel prison and
guard, and were of course overjoyed to find themselves safe with
us. i told them that, as soon as things settled down, they should
report to general howard, who would provide for their safety, and
enable them to travel with us. one of them handed me a paper,
asking me to read it at my leisure; i put it in my breast-pocket
and rode on. general howard was still with me, and, riding down the
street which led by the right to the charleston depot, we found it
and a large storehouse burned to the ground, but there were, on the
platform and ground near by, piles of cotton bags filled with corn
and corn-meal, partially burned.
a detachment of stone's brigade was guarding this, and
separating the good from the bad. we rode along the railroad-track,
some three or four hundred yards, to a large foundery, when some
man rode up and said the rebel cavalry were close by, and he warned
us that we might get shot. we accordingly turned back to the
market-square, and en route noticed that, several of the men were
evidently in liquor, when i called general howard's attention to
it. he left me and rode toward general woods's head of column,
which was defiling through the town. on reaching the market-square,
i again met dr. goodwin, and inquired where he proposed to quarter
me, and he said that he had selected the house of blanton duncan,
esq., a citizen of louisville, kentucky, then a resident there, who
had the contract for manufacturing the confederate money, and had
fled with hampton's cavalry. we all rode some six or eight squares
back from the new state-house, and found a very good modern house,
completely furnished, with stabling and a large yard, took it as
our headquarters, and occupied it during our stay. i considered
general howard as in command of the place, and referred the many
applicants for guards and protection to him. before our
headquarters-wagons had got up, i strolled through the streets of
columbia, found sentinels posted at the principal intersections,
and generally good order prevailing, but did not again return to
the main street, because it was filled with a crowd of citizens
watching the soldiers marching by.
during the afternoon of that day, february th, the whole of
the fifteenth corps passed through the town and out on the camden
and winnsboro' roads. the seventeenth corps did not enter the city
at all, but crossed directly over to the winnsboro' road from the
pontoon bridge at broad river, which was about four miles above the
city.
after we had got, as it were, settled in blanton duncan's house,
say about  p.m., i overhauled my pocket according to custom, to
read more carefully the various notes and memoranda received during
the day, and found the paper which had been given me, as described,
by one of our escaped prisoners. it proved to be the song of
"sherman's march to the sea," which had been composed by adjutant
s. h. m. byers, of the fifth iowa infantry, when a prisoner in the
asylum at columbia, which had been beautifully written off by a
fellow-prisoner, and handed to me in person. this appeared to me so
good that i at once sent for byers, attached him to my staff,
provided him with horse and equipment, and took him as far as
fayetteville, north carolina, whence he was sent to washington as
bearer of dispatches. he is now united states consul at zurich,
switzerland, where i have since been his guest. i insert the song
here for convenient reference and preservation. byers said that
there was an excellent glee-club among the prisoners in columbia,
who used to sing it well, with an audience often of rebel
ladies:
composed by adjutant byers, fifth iowa infantry. arranged and
sung by the prisoners in columbia prison.
our camp-fires shone bright on the mountain
that frowned on the river below,
as we stood by our guns in the morning,
and eagerly watched for the foe;
when a rider came out of the darkness
that hung over mountain and tree,
and shouted, "boys, up and be ready!
for sherman will march to the sea!"
then sang we a song of our chieftain,
that echoed over river and lea;
and the stars of our banner shone brighter
when sherman marched down to the sea!
then cheer upon cheer for bold sherman
went up from each valley and glen,
and the bugles reechoed the music
that came from the lips of the men;
for we knew that the stars in our banner
more bright in their splendor would be,
and that blessings from northland world greet us,
when sherman marched down to the sea!
then sang we a song, etc.
then forward, boys! forward to battle!
we marched on our wearisome way,
we stormed the wild hills of resacar
god bless those who fell on that day!
then kenesaw frowned in its glory,
frowned down on the flag of the free;
but the east and the west bore our standard,
and sherman marched on to the sea!
then sang we a song, etc.
still onward we pressed, till our banners
swept out from atlanta's grim walls,
and the blood of the patriot dampened
the soil where the traitor-flag falls;
but we paused not to weep for the fallen,
who slept by each river and tree,
yet we twined them a wreath of the laurel,
as sherman marched down to the sea!
then sang we a song, etc.
oh, proud was our army that morning,
that stood where the pine darkly towers,
when sherman said, "boys, you are weary,
but to-day fair savannah is ours!"
then sang we the song of our chieftain,
that echoed over river and lea,
and the stars in our banner shone brighter
when sherman camped down by the sea!
toward evening of february th, the mayor, dr. goodwin, came to
my quarters at duncan's house, and remarked that there was a lady
in columbia who professed to be a special friend of mine. on his
giving her name, i could not recall it, but inquired as to her
maiden or family name. he answered poyas. it so happened that, when
i was a lieutenant at fort moultrie, in -', i used very often
to visit a family of that name on the east branch of cooper river,
about forty miles from fort moultrie, and to hunt with the son, mr.
james poyas, an elegant young fellow and a fine sportsman. his
father, mother, and several sisters, composed the family, and were
extremely hospitable. one of the ladies was very fond of painting
in water-colors, which was one of my weaknesses, and on one
occasion i had presented her with a volume treating of
water-colors. of course, i was glad to renew the acquaintance, and
proposed to dr. goodwin that we should walk to her house and visit
this lady, which we did. the house stood beyond the charlotte
depot, in a large lot, was of frame, with a high porch, which was
reached by a set of steps outside. entering this yard, i noticed
ducks and chickens, and a general air of peace and comfort that was
really pleasant to behold at that time of universal desolation; the
lady in question met us at the head of the steps and invited us
into a parlor which was perfectly neat and well furnished. after
inquiring about her father, mother, sisters, and especially her
brother james, my special friend, i could not help saying that i
was pleased to notice that our men had not handled her house and
premises as roughly as was their wont. "i owe it to you, general,"
she answered. "not at all. i did not know you were here till a few
minutes ago." she reiterated that she was indebted to me for the
perfect safety of her house and property, and added, "you remember,
when you were at our house on cooper river in , you gave me a
book;" and she handed me the book in question, on the fly leaf of
which was written: "to miss poyas, with the compliments of w. t.
sherman, first-lieutenant third artillery." she then explained
that, as our army approached columbia, there was a doubt in her
mind whether the terrible sherman who was devastating the land were
w. t. sherman or t. w. sherman, both known to be generals in the
northern army; but, on the supposition that he was her old
acquaintance, when wade hampton's cavalry drew out of the city,
calling out that the yankees were coming, she armed herself with
this book, and awaited the crisis. soon the shouts about the
markethouse announced that the yankees had come; very soon men were
seen running up and down the streets; a parcel of them poured over
the fence, began to chase the chickens and ducks, and to enter her
house. she observed one large man, with full beard, who exercised
some authority, and to him she appealed in the name of "his
general." "what do you know of uncle billy?" "why," she said, "when
he was a young man he used to be our friend in charleston, and here
is a book he gave me." the officer or soldier took the book, looked
at the inscription, and, turning to his fellows, said: "boys,
that's so; that's uncle billy's writing, for i have seen it often
before." he at once commanded the party to stop pillaging, and left
a man in charge of the house, to protect her until the regular
provost-guard should be established. i then asked her if the
regular guard or sentinel had been as good to her. she assured me
that he was a very nice young man; that he had been telling her all
about his family in iowa; and that at that very instant of time he
was in another room minding her baby. now, this lady had good sense
and tact, and had thus turned aside a party who, in five minutes
more, would have rifled her premises of all that was good to eat or
wear. i made her a long social visit, and, before leaving columbia,
gave her a half-tierce of rice and about one hundred pounds of ham
from our own mess-stores.
in like manner, that same evening i found in mrs. simons another
acquaintance--the wife of the brother of hon. james simons, of
charleston, who had been miss wragg. when columbia was on fire that
night, and her house in danger, i had her family and effects
carried to my own headquarters, gave them my own room and bed, and,
on leaving columbia the next day, supplied her with a half-barrel
of hams and a half-tierce of rice. i mention these specific facts
to show that, personally, i had no malice or desire to destroy that
city or its inhabitants, as is generally believed at the south.
having walked over much of the suburbs of columbia in the
afternoon, and being tired, i lay down on a bed in blanton duncan's
house to rest. soon after dark i became conscious that a bright
light was shining on the walls; and, calling some one of my staff
(major nichols, i think) to inquire the cause, he said there seemed
to be a house on fire down about the market-house. the same high
wind still prevailed, and, fearing the consequences, i bade him go
in person to see if the provost-guard were doing its duty. he soon
returned, and reported that the block of buildings directly
opposite the burning cotton of that morning was on fire, and that
it was spreading; but he had found general woods on the ground,
with plenty of men trying to put the fire out, or, at least, to
prevent its extension. the fire continued to increase, and the
whole heavens became lurid. i dispatched messenger after messenger
to generals howard, logan, and woods, and received from them
repeated assurances that all was being done that could be done, but
that the high wind was spreading the flames beyond all control.
these general officers were on the ground all night, and hazen's
division had been brought into the city to assist woods's division,
already there. about eleven o'clock at night i went down-town
myself, colonel dayton with me; we walked to mr. simons's house,
from which i could see the flames rising high in the air, and could
hear the roaring of the fire. i advised the ladies to move to my
headquarters, had our own headquarter-wagons hitched up, and their
effects carried there, as a place of greater safety. the whole air
was full of sparks and of flying masses of cotton, shingles, etc.,
some of which were carried four or five blocks, and started new
fires. the men seemed generally under good control, and certainly
labored hard to girdle the fire, to prevent its spreading; but, so
long as the high wind prevailed, it was simply beyond human
possibility. fortunately, about  or  a.m., the wind moderated,
and gradually the fire was got under control; but it had burned out
the very heart of the city, embracing several churches, the old
state-house, and the school or asylum of that very sister of
charity who had appealed for my personal protection. nickerson's
hotel, in which several of my staff were quartered, was burned
down, but the houses occupied by myself, generals howard and logan,
were not burned at all. many of the people thought that this fire
was deliberately planned and executed. this is not true. it was
accidental, and in my judgment began with the cotton which general
hampton's men had set fire to on leaving the city (whether by his
orders or not is not material), which fire was partially subdued
early in the day by our men; but, when night came, the high wind
fanned it again into full blaze, carried it against the frame
houses, which caught like tinder, and soon spread beyond our
control.
this whole subject has since been thoroughly and judicially
investigated, in some cotton cases, by the mixed commission on
american and british claims, under the treaty of washington, which
commission failed to award a verdict in favor of the english
claimants, and thereby settled the fact that the destruction of
property in columbia, during that night, did not result from the
acts of the general government of the united states--that is to
say, from my army. in my official report of this conflagration, i
distinctly charged it to general wade hampton, and confess i did so
pointedly, to shake the faith of his people in him, for he was in
my opinion boastful, and professed to be the special champion of
south carolina.
the morning sun of february th rose bright and clear over a
ruined city. about half of it was in ashes and in smouldering
heaps. many of the people were houseless, and gathered in groups in
the suburbs, or in the open parks and spaces, around their scanty
piles of furniture. general howard, in concert with the mayor, did
all that was possible to provide other houses for them; and by my
authority he turned over to the sisters of charity the methodist
college, and to the mayor five hundred beef-cattle; to help feed
the people; i also gave the mayor (dr. goodwin) one hundred
muskets, with which to arm a guard to maintain order after we
should leave the neighborhood. during the th and th we remained
in columbia, general howard's troops engaged in tearing up and
destroying the railroad, back toward the wateree, while a strong
detail, under the immediate supervision of colonel o. m. poe,
united states engineers, destroyed the state arsenal, which was
found to be well supplied with shot, shell, and ammunition. these
were hauled in wagons to the saluda river, under the supervision of
colonel baylor, chief of ordnance, and emptied into deep water,
causing a very serious accident by the bursting of a
percussion-shell, as it struck another on the margin of the water.
the flame followed back a train of powder which had sifted out,
reached the wagons, still partially loaded, and exploded them,
killing sixteen men and destroying several wagons and teams of
mules. we also destroyed several valuable founderies and the
factory of confederate money. the dies had been carried away, but
about sixty handpresses remained. there was also found an immense
quantity of money, in various stages of manufacture, which our men
spent and gambled with in the most lavish manner.
having utterly ruined columbia, the right wing began its march
northward, toward winnsboro', on the th, which we reached on the
st, and found general slocum, with the left wing, who had come by
the way of alston. thence the right wing was turned eastward,
toward cheraw, and fayetteville, north carolina, to cross the
catawba river at peay's ferry. the cavalry was ordered to follow
the railroad north as far as chester, and then to turn east to
rocky mount, the point indicated for the passage of the left wing.
in person i reached rocky mount on the d, with the twentieth
corps, which laid its pontoon-bridge and crossed over during the
d. kilpatrick arrived the next day, in the midst of heavy rain,
and was instructed to cross the catawba at once, by night, and to
move up to lancaster, to make believe we were bound for charlotte,
to which point i heard that beauregard had directed all his
detachments, including a corps of hood's old army, which had been
marching parallel with us, but had failed to make junction with,
the forces immediately opposing us. of course, i had no purpose of
going to charlotte, for the right wing was already moving rapidly
toward fayetteville, north carolina. the rain was so heavy and
persistent that the catawba, river rose fast, and soon after i had
crossed the pontoon bridge at rocky mount it was carried away,
leaving general davis, with the fourteenth corps, on the west bank.
the roads were infamous, so i halted the twentieth corps at hanging
rock for some days, to allow time for the fourteenth to get
over.
general davis had infinite difficulty in reconstructing his
bridge, and was compelled to use the fifth chains of his wagons for
anchor-chains, so that we were delayed nearly a week in that
neighborhood. while in camp at hanging rock two prisoners were
brought to me--one a chaplain, the other a boy, son of richard
bacot, of charleston, whom i had known as a cadet at west point.
they were just from charleston, and had been sent away by general
hardee in advance, because he was, they said, evacuating
charleston. rumors to the same effect had reached me through the
negroes, and it was, moreover, reported that wilmington, north
carolina, was in possession of the yankee troops; so that i had
every reason to be satisfied that our march was fully reaping all
the fruits we could possibly ask for. charleston was, in fact,
evacuated by general hardee on the th of february, and was taken
possession of by a brigade of general fosters troops, commanded by
general schimmelpfennig, the same day. hardee had availed himself
of his only remaining railroad, by florence to cheraw; had sent
there much of his ammunition and stores, and reached it with the
effective part of the garrison in time to escape across the pedee
river before our arrival. wilmington was captured by general terry
on the d of february; but of this important event we only knew by
the vague rumors which reached us through rebel sources.
general jeff. c. davis got across the catawba during the th,
and the general march was resumed on cheraw. kilpatrick remained
near lancaster, skirmishing with wheeler's and hampton's cavalry,
keeping up the delusion that we proposed to move on charlotte and
salisbury, but with orders to watch the progress of the fourteenth
corps, and to act in concert with it, on its left rear. on the st
of march i was at finlay's bridge across lynch's creek, the roads
so bad that we had to corduroy nearly every foot of the way; but i
was in communication with all parts of the army, which had met no
serious opposition from the enemy. on the d of march we entered
the village of chesterfield, skirmishing with butler's cavalry,
which gave ground rapidly. there i received a message from general
howard, who, reported that he was already in cheraw with the
seventeenth corps, and that the fifteenth was near at hand.
general hardee had retreated eastward across the pedee, burning
the bridge. i therefore directed the left wing to march for
sneedsboro', about ten miles above cheraw, to cross the pedee
there, while i in person proposed to cross over and join the right
wing in cheraw. early in the morning of the d of march i rode out
of chesterfield along with the twentieth corps, which filled the
road, forded thompson's creek, and, at the top of the hill beyond,
found a road branching off to the right, which corresponded with
the one, on my map leading to cheraw. seeing a negro standing by
the roadside, looking at the troops passing, i inquired of him what
road that was. "him lead to cheraw, master!" "is it a good road,
and how far?" "a very good road, and eight or ten miles." "any
guerrillas?"
"oh! no, master, dey is gone two days ago; you could have played
cards on der coat-tails, dey was in sich a hurry!" i was on my
lexington horse, who was very handsome and restive, so i made
signal to my staff to follow, as i proposed to go without escort. i
turned my horse down the road, and the rest of the staff followed.
general barry took up the questions about the road, and asked the
same negro what he was doing there. he answered, "dey say massa
sherman will be along soon!" "why," said general barry, "that was
general sherman you were talking to." the poor negro, almost in the
attitude of prayer, exclaimed: "de great god! just look at his
horse!" he ran up and trotted by my side for a mile or so, and gave
me all the information he possessed, but he seemed to admire the
horse more than the rider.
we reached cheraw in a couple of hours in a drizzling rain, and,
while waiting for our wagons to come up, i staid with general blair
in a large house, the property of a blockade-runner, whose family
remained. general howard occupied another house farther down-town.
he had already ordered his pontoon-bridge to be laid across the
pedee, there a large, deep, navigable stream, and mower's division
was already across, skirmishing with the enemy about two miles out.
cheraw was found to be full of stores which had been sent up from
charleston prior to its evacuation, and which could not be removed.
i was satisfied, from inquiries, that general hardee had with him
only the charleston garrison, that the enemy had not divined our
movements, and that consequently they were still scattered from
charlotte around to florence, then behind us. having thus secured
the passage of the pedee, i felt no uneasiness about the future,
because there remained no further great impediment between us and
cape fear river, which i felt assured was by that time in
possession of our friends. the day was so wet that we all kept
in-doors; and about noon general blair invited us to take lunch
with him. we passed down into the basement dining-room, where the
regular family table was spread with an excellent meal; and during
its progress i was asked to take some wine, which stood upon the
table in venerable bottles. it was so very good that i inquired
where it came from. general blair simply asked, "do you like it?"
but i insisted upon knowing where he had got it; he only replied by
asking if i liked it, and wanted some. he afterward sent to my
bivouac a case containing a dozen bottles of the finest madeira i
ever tasted; and i learned that he had captured, in cheraw, the
wine of some of the old aristocratic families of charleston, who
had sent it up to cheraw for safety, and heard afterward that blair
had found about eight wagon-loads of this wine, which he
distributed to the army generally, in very fair proportions.
after finishing our lunch, as we passed out of the dining room,
general blair asked me, if i did not want some saddle-blankets, or
a rug for my tent, and, leading me into the hall to a space under
the stairway, he pointed out a pile of carpets which had also been
sent up from charleston for safety. after our headquarter-wagons
got up, and our bivouac was established in a field near by, i sent
my orderly (walter) over to general blair, and he came back
staggering under a load of carpets, out of which the officers and
escort made excellent tent-rugs, saddle-cloths, and blankets. there
was an immense amount of stores in cheraw, which were used or
destroyed; among them twenty-four guns, two thousand muskets, and
thirty-six hundred barrels of gunpowder. by the carelessness of a
soldier, an immense pile of this powder was exploded, which shook
the town badly; and killed and maimed several of our men.
we remained in or near cheraw till the th of march, by which
time the army was mostly across the pedee river, and was prepared
to resume the march on fayetteville. in a house where general
hardee had been, i found a late new york tribune, of fully a month
later date than any i had seen. it contained a mass of news of
great interest to us, and one short paragraph which i thought
extremely mischievous. i think it was an editorial, to the effect
that at last the editor had the satisfaction to inform his readers
that general sherman would next be heard from about goldsboro',
because his supply-vessels from savannah were known to be
rendezvousing at morehead city:--now, i knew that general hardee
had read that same paper, and that he would be perfectly able to
draw his own inferences. up to, that moment i had endeavored so to
feign to our left that we had completely, misled our antagonists;
but this was no longer possible, and i concluded that we must be
ready, for the concentration in our front of all the force subject
to general jos. johnston's orders, for i was there also informed
that he had been restored to the full command of the confederate
forces in south and north carolina.
on the th of march i crossed the pedee, and all the army
marched for fayetteville: the seventeenth corps kept well to the
right, to make room; the fifteenth corps marched by a direct road;
the fourteenth corps also followed a direct road from sneedsboro',
where it had crossed the pedee; and the twentieth corps, which had
come into cheraw for the convenience of the pontoon-bridge,
diverged to the left, so as to enter fayetteville next after the
fourteenth corps, which was appointed to lead into fayetteville.
kilpatrick held his cavalry still farther to the left rear on the
roads from lancaster, by way of wadesboro' and new gilead, so as to
cover our trains from hampton's and wheeler's cavalry, who had
first retreated toward the north. i traveled with the fifteenth
corps, and on the th of march reached laurel hill, north carolina.
satisfied that our troops must be at wilmington, i determined to
send a message there; i called for my man, corporal pike, whom i
had rescued as before described, at columbia, who was then
traveling with our escort, and instructed him in disguise to work
his way to the cape fear river, secure a boat, and float down to
wilmington to convey a letter, and to report our approach. i also
called on general howard for another volunteer, and he brought me a
very clever young sergeant, who is now a commissioned officer in
the regular army. each of these got off during the night by
separate routes, bearing the following message, reduced to the same
cipher we used in telegraphic messages:
in the field, laurel hill, wednesday, march , .
commanding officer, wilmington, north carolina:
we are marching for fayetteville, will be there saturday, sunday,
and monday, and will then march for goldsboro'.
if possible, send a boat up cape fear river, and have word conveyed
to general schofield that i expect to meet him about goldsboro'. we
are all well and have done finely. the rains make our roads
difficult, and may delay us about fayetteville, in which case i
would like to have some bread, sugar, and coffee. we have abundance
of all else. i expect to reach goldsboro' by the th
instant.
w. t. sherman, major-general.
on the th i was with the fifteenth corps, and toward evening
reached a little church called bethel, in the woods, in which we
took refuge in a terrible storm of rain, which poured all night,
making the roads awful. all the men were at work corduroying the
roads, using fence-rails and split saplings, and every foot of the
way had thus to be corduroyed to enable the artillery and wagons to
pass. on the th we made some little progress; on the th i
reached fayetteville, and found that general hardee, followed by
wade hampton's cavalry, had barely escaped across cape fear river,
burning the bridge which i had hoped to save. on reaching
fayetteville i found general slocum already in possession with the
fourteenth corps, and all the rest of the army was near at hand. a
day or two before, general kilpatrick, to our left rear, had
divided his force into two parts, occupying roads behind the
twentieth corps, interposing between our infantry columns and wade
hampton's cavalry. the latter, doubtless to make junction with
general hardee, in fayetteville, broke across this line, captured
the house in which general kilpatrick and the brigade-commander,
general spencer, were, and for a time held possession of the camp
and artillery of the brigade. however, general kilpatrick and most
of his men escaped into a swamp with their arms, reorganized and
returned, catching hampton's men--in turn, scattered and drove them
away, recovering most of his camp and artillery; but hampton got
off with kilpatrick's private horses and a couple hundred
prisoners, of which he boasted much in passing through
fayetteville.
it was also reported that, in the morning after hardee's army
was all across the bridge at cape fear river, hampton, with a small
bodyguard, had remained in town, ready to retreat and burn the
bridge as soon as our forces made their appearance. he was getting
breakfast at the hotel when the alarm was given, when he and his
escort took saddle, but soon realized that the alarm came from a
set of our foragers, who, as usual, were extremely bold and rash.
on these he turned, scattered them, killing some and making others
prisoners; among them general howard's favorite scout, captain
duncan. hampton then crossed the bridge and burned it.
i took up my quarters at the old united states arsenal, which
was in fine order, and had been much enlarged by the confederate
authorities, who never dreamed that an invading army would reach it
from the west; and i also found in fayetteville the widow and
daughter of my first captain (general childs), of the third
artillery, learned that her son fred had been the ordnance-officer
in charge of the arsenal, and had of course fled with hardee's
army.
during the th. the whole army closed down upon fayetteville,
and immediate preparations were made to lay two pontoon bridges,
one near the burned bridge, and another about four miles lower
down.
sunday, march th, was a day of sabbath stillness in
fayetteville. the people generally attended their churches, for
they were a very pious people, descended in a large measure from
the old scotch covenanters, and our men too were resting from the
toils and labors of six weeks of as hard marching as ever fell to
the lot of soldiers. shortly after noon was heard in the distance
the shrill whistle of a steamboat, which came nearer and nearer,
and soon a shout, long and continuous, was raised down by the
river, which spread farther and farther, and we all felt that it
meant a messenger from home. the effect was electric, and no one
can realize the feeling unless, like us, he has been for months cut
off from all communication with friends, and compelled to listen to
the croakings and prognostications of open enemies. but in a very
few minutes came up through the town to the arsenal on the plateau
behind a group of officers, among whom was a large, florid
seafaring man, named ainsworth, bearing a small mail-bag from
general terry, at wilmington, having left at  p.m. the day before.
our couriers had got through safe from laurel hill, and this was
the prompt reply.
as in the case of our former march from atlanta, intense anxiety
had been felt for our safety, and general terry had been prompt to
open communication. after a few minutes' conference with captain
ainsworth about the capacity of his boat, and the state of facts
along the river, i instructed him to be ready to start back at 
p.m., and ordered captain byers to get ready to carry dispatches to
washington. i also authorized general howard to send back by this
opportunity some of the fugitives who had traveled with his army
all the way from columbia, among whom were mrs. feaster and her two
beautiful daughters.
i immediately prepared letters for secretary stanton, generals
halleck and grant, and generals schofield, foster, easton, and
beckwith, all of which have been published, but i include here only
those to the secretary of war, and generals grant and terry, as
samples of the whole:
fayettville, north carolina, sunday, march. , .
hon. e. m. stanton, secretary of war.
dear sir: i know you will be pleased to hear that my army has
reached this point, and has opened communication with wilmington. a
tug-boat came up this morning, and will start back at  p. m.
i have written a letter to general grant, the substance of which he
will doubtless communicate, and it must suffice for me to tell you
what i know will give you pleasure--that i have done all that i
proposed, and the fruits seem to me ample for the time employed.
charleston, georgetown, and wilmington, are incidents, while the
utter demolition of the railroad system of south carolina, and the
utter destruction of the enemy's arsenals of columbia, cheraw, and
fayetteville, are the principals of the movement. these points were
regarded as inaccessible to us, and now no place in the confederacy
is safe against the army of the west. let lee hold on to richmond,
and we will destroy his country; and then of what use is richmond.
he must come out and fight us on open ground, and for that we must
ever be ready. let him stick behind his parapets, and he will
perish.
i remember well what you asked me, and think i am on the right
road, though a long one. my army is as united and cheerful as ever,
and as full of confidence in itself and its leaders. it is utterly
impossible for me to enumerate what we have done, but i inclose a
slip just handed me, which is but partial. at columbia and cheraw
we destroyed nearly all the gunpowder and cartridges which the
confederacy had in this part of the country. this arsenal is in
fine order, and has been much enlarged. i cannot leave a detachment
to hold it, therefore shall burn it, blow it up with gunpowder, and
then with rams knock down its walls. i take it for granted the
united states will never again trust north carolina with an arsenal
to appropriate at her pleasure.
hoping that good fortune may still attend my army. i remain your
servant,
w. t. sherman, major-general.
fayettville, north carolina, sunday, march. , .
lieutenant-general u. s. grant, commanding united states army, city
point, virginia.
dear general: we reached this place yesterday at noon; hardee, as
usual, retreating across the cape fear, burning his bridges; but
our pontoons will be up to-day, and, with as little delay as
possible, i will be after him toward goldsboro'.
a tug has just come up from wilmington, and before i get off from
here, i hope to get from wilmington some shoes and stockings,
sugar, coffee, and flour. we are abundantly supplied with all else,
having in a measure lived off the country.
the army is in splendid health, condition, and spirits, though we
have had foul weather, and roads that would have stopped travel to
almost any other body of men i ever heard of.
our march, was substantially what i designed--straight on columbia,
feigning on branchville and augusta. we destroyed, in passing, the
railroad from the edisto nearly up to aiken; again, from orangeburg
to the congaree; again, from colombia down to kingsville on the
wateree, and up toward charlotte as far as the chester line; thence
we turned east on cheraw and fayetteville. at colombia we destroyed
immense arsenals and railroad establishments, among which wore
forty-three cannon. at cheraw we found also machinery and material
of war sent from charleston, among which were twenty-five guns and
thirty-six hundred barrels of powder; and here we find about twenty
guns and a magnificent united states' arsenal.
we cannot afford to leave detachments, and i shall therefore
destroy this valuable arsenal, so the enemy shall not have its use;
and the united states should never again confide such valuable
property to a people who have betrayed a trust.
i could leave here to-morrow, but want to clear my columns of the
vast crowd of refugees and negroes that encumber us. some i will
send down the river in boats, and the rest to wilmington by land,
under small escort, as soon as we are across cape fear river.
i hope you have not been uneasy about us, and that the fruits of
this march will be appreciated. it had to be made not only to
destroy the valuable depots by the way, but for its incidents in
the necessary fall of charleston, georgetown, and wilmington. if i
can now add goldsboro' without too much cost, i will be in a
position to aid you materially in the spring campaign.
jos. johnston may try to interpose between me here and schofield
about newbern; but i think he will not try that, but concentrate
his scattered armies at raleigh, and i will go straight at him as
soon as i get our men reclothed and our wagons reloaded.
keep everybody busy, and let stoneman push toward greensboro' or
charlotte from knoxville; even a feint in that quarter will be most
important.
the railroad from charlotte to danville is all that is left to the
enemy, and it will not do for me to go there, on account of the
red-clay hills which are impassable to wheels in wet weather.
i expect to make a junction with general schofield in ten
days.
yours truly,
w. t. sherman, major-general.
fayettville, north carolina, sunday, march. , .
major-general terry, commanding united states forces, wilmington,
north carolina.
general: i have just received your message by the tug which left
wilmington at  p.m. yesterday, which arrived here without trouble.
the scout who brought me your cipher-message started back last
night with my answers, which are superseded by the fact of your
opening the river.
general howard just reports that he has secured one of the enemy's
steamboats below the city, general slocum will try to secure two
others known to be above, and we will load them with refugees
(white and black) who have clung to our skirts, impeded our
movements, and consumed our food.
we have swept the country well from savannah to here, and the men
and animals are in fine condition. had it not been for the foul
weather, i would have caught hardee at cheraw or here; but at
columbia, cheraw, and here, we have captured immense stores, and
destroyed machinery, guns, ammunition, and property, of inestimable
value to our enemy. at all points he has fled from us, "standing
not on the order of his going."
the people of south carolina, instead of feeding lee's army, will
now call on lee to feed them.
i want you to send me all the shoes, stockings, drawers, sugar,
coffee, and flour, you can spare; finish the loads with oats or
corn: have the boats escorted, and let them run at night at any
risk. we must not give time for jos. johnston to concentrate at
goldsboro'. we cannot prevent his concentrating at raleigh, but he
shall have no rest. i want general schofield to go on with his
railroad from newbern as far as he can, and you should do the same
from wilmington. if we can get the roads to and secure goldsboro'
by april th, it will be soon enough; but every day now is worth a
million of dollars. i can whip jos. johnston provided he does not
catch one of my corps in flank, and i will see that the army
marches hence to goldsboro' in compact form.
i must rid our army of from twenty to thirty thousand useless
mouths; as many to go down cape fear as possible, and the rest to
go in vehicles or on captured horses via clinton to
wilmington.
i thank you for the energetic action that has marked your course,
and shall be most happy to meet you. i am, truly your friend,
w. t. sherman, major-general.
in quick succession i received other messages from general
terry, of older date, and therefore superseded by that brought by
the tug davidson, viz., by two naval officers, who had come up
partly by canoes and partly by land; general terry had also sent
the thirteenth pennsylvania cavalry to search for us, under colonel
kerwin, who had dispatched major berks with fifty men, who reached
us at fayetteville; so that, by march th, i was in full
communication with general terry and the outside world. still, i
was anxious to reach goldsboro', there to make junction with
general schofield, so as to be ready for the next and last stage of
the war. i then knew that my special antagonist, general jos. e.
johnston, was back, with part of his old army; that he would not be
misled by feints and false reports, and would somehow compel me to
exercise more caution than i had hitherto done. i then
over-estimated his force at thirty-seven thousand infantry,
supposed to be made up of s. d. lee's corps, four thousand;
cheatham's, five thousand; hoke's, eight thousand; hardee's, ten
thousand; and other detachments, ten thousand; with hampton's,
wheeler's, and butler's cavalry, about eight thousand. of these,
only hardee and the cavalry were immediately in our front, while
the bulk of johnston's army was supposed to be collecting at or
near raleigh. i was determined, however, to give him as little time
for organization as possible, and accordingly crossed cape fear
river, with all the army, during the th and th, leaving one
division as a rearguard, until the arsenal could be completely
destroyed. this was deliberately and completely leveled on the
th, when fire was applied to the wreck. little other damage was
done at fayetteville.
on the th the tug davidson again arrived from wilmington, with
general dodge, quartermaster, on board, reporting that there was no
clothing to be had at wilmington; but he brought up some sugar and
coffee, which were most welcome, and some oats. he was followed by
a couple of gunboats, under command of captain young, united states
navy, who reached fayetteville after i had left, and undertook to
patrol the river as long as the stage of water would permit; and
general dodge also promised to use the captured steamboats for a
like purpose. meantime, also, i had sent orders to general
schofield, at newbern, and to general terry, at wilmington, to move
with their effective forces straight for goldsboro', where i
expected to meet them by the th of march.
on the th of march the whole army was across cape fear river,
and at once began its march for goldsboro'; the seventeenth corps
still on the right, the fifteenth next in order, then the
fourteenth and twentieth on the extreme left; the cavalry, acting
in close concert with the left flank. with almost a certainty of
being attacked on this flank, i had instructed general slocum to
send his corps-trains under strong escort by an interior road,
holding four divisions ready for immediate battle. general howard
was in like manner ordered to keep his trains well to his right,
and to have four divisions unencumbered, about six miles ahead of
general slocum, within easy support.
in the mean time, i had dispatched by land to wilmington a train
of refugees who had followed the army all the way from columbia,
south carolina, under an escort of two hundred men, commanded by
major john a. winson (one hundred and sixteenth illinois infantry),
so that we were disencumbered, and prepared for instant battle on
our left and exposed flank.
in person i accompanied general slocum, and during the night of
march th was thirteen miles out on the raleigh road. this flank
followed substantially a road along cape fear river north,
encountered pretty stubborn resistance by hardee's infantry,
artillery, and cavalry, and the ground favored our enemy; for the
deep river, cape fear, was on his right, and north river on his
left, forcing us to attack him square in front. i proposed to drive
hardee well beyond averysboro', and then to turn to the right by
bentonville for goldsboro'. during the day it rained very hard, and
i had taken refuge in an old cooper-shop, where a prisoner of war
was brought to me (sent back from the skirmish-line by general
kilpatrick), who proved to be colonel albert rhett, former
commander of fort sumter. he was a tall, slender, and handsome
young man, dressed in the most approved rebel uniform, with high
jackboots beautifully stitched, and was dreadfully mortified to
find himself a prisoner in our hands. general frank blair happened
to be with me at the moment, and we were much amused at rhett's
outspoken disgust at having been captured without a fight. he said
he was a brigade commander, and that his brigade that day was
hardee's rear-guard; that his command was composed mostly of the
recent garrisons of the batteries of charleston harbor, and had
little experience in woodcraft; that he was giving ground to us as
fast as hardee's army to his rear moved back, and during this
operation he was with a single aide in the woods, and was captured
by two men of kilpatrick's skirmish-line that was following up his
retrograde movement. these men called on him to surrender, and
ordered him, in language more forcible than polite, to turn and
ride back. he first supposed these men to be of hampton's cavalry,
and threatened to report them to general hampton for disrespectful
language; but he was soon undeceived, and was conducted to
kilpatrick, who sent him back to general slocum's guard.
the rain was falling heavily, and, our wagons coming up, we went
into camp there, and had rhett and general blair to take supper
with us, and our conversation was full and quite interesting. in
due time, however, rhett was passed over by general slocum to his
provost-guard, with orders to be treated with due respect,--and was
furnished with a horse to ride.
the next day (the th) the opposition continued stubborn, and
near averysboro' hardee had taken up a strong position, before
which general slocum deployed jackson's division (of the twentieth
corps), with part of ward's. kilpatrick was on his right front.
coming up, i advised that a brigade should make a wide circuit by
the left, and, if possible, catch this line in flank. the movement
was completely successful, the first line of the enemy was swept
away, and we captured the larger part of rhett's brigade, two
hundred and seventeen men, including captain macbeth's battery of
three guns, and buried one hundred and eight dead.
the deployed lines (ward's and jackson's) pressed on, and found
hardee again intrenched; but the next morning he was gone, in full
retreat toward smithfield. in this action, called the battle of
averysboro', we lost twelve officers and sixty-five men killed, and
four hundred and seventy-seven men wounded; a serious loss, because
every wounded man had to be carried in an ambulance. the rebel
wounded (sixty-eight) were carried to a house near by, all surgical
operations necessary were performed by our surgeons, and then these
wounded men were left in care of an officer and four men of the
rebel prisoners, with a scanty supply of food, which was the best
we could do for them. in person i visited this house while the
surgeons were at work, with arms and legs lying around loose, in
the yard and on the porch; and in a room on a bed lay a pale,
handsome young fellow, whose left arm had just been cut off near
the shoulder. some one used my name, when he asked, in a feeble
voice, if i were general sherman. he then announced himself as
captain macbeth, whose battery had just been captured; and said
that he remembered me when i used to visit his father's house, in
charleston. i inquired about his family, and enabled him to write a
note to his mother, which was sent her afterward from goldsboro'. i
have seen that same young gentleman since in st. louis, where he
was a clerk in an insurance-office.
while the battle of averysboro' was in progress, and i was
sitting on my horse, i was approached by a man on foot, without
shoes or coat, and his head bandaged by a handkerchief. he
announced himself as the captain duncan who had been captured by
wade hampton in fayetteville, but had escaped; and, on my inquiring
how he happened to be in that plight, he explained that when he was
a prisoner wade hampton's men had made him "get out of his coat,
hat, and shoes," which they appropriated to themselves. he said
wade hampton had seen them do it, and he had appealed to him
personally for protection, as an officer, but hampton answered him
with a curse. i sent duncan to general kilpatrick, and heard
afterward that kilpatrick had applied to general slocum for his
prisoner, colonel rhett, whom he made march on foot the rest of the
way to goldsboro', in retaliation. there was a story afloat that
kilpatrick made him get out of those fine boots, but restored them
because none of his own officers had feet delicate enough to wear
them. of course, i know nothing of this personally, and have never
seen rhett since that night by the cooper-shop; and suppose that he
is the editor who recently fought a duel in new orleans.
from averysboro' the left wing turned east, toward goldsboro',
the fourteenth corps leading. i remained with this wing until the
night of the th, when we were within twenty-seven miles of
goldsboro' and five from bentonsville; and, supposing that all
danger was over, i crossed over to join howard's column, to the
right, so as to be nearer to generals schofield and terry, known to
be approaching goldsboro'. i overtook general howard at
falling-creek church, and found his column well drawn out, by
reason of the bad roads. i had heard some cannonading over about
slocum's head of column, and supposed it to indicate about the same
measure of opposition by hardee's troops and hampton's cavalry
before experienced; but during the day a messenger overtook me, and
notified me that near bentonsville general slocum had run up
against johnston's whole army. i sent back orders for him to fight
defensively to save time, and that i would come up with
reenforcements from the direction of cog's bridge, by the road
which we had reached near falling-creek church. the country was
very obscure, and the maps extremely defective.
by this movement i hoped general slocum would hold johnston's
army facing west, while i would come on his rear from the east. the
fifteenth corps, less one division (hazen's), still well to the
rear, was turned at once toward bentonsville; hazen's division was
ordered to slocum's flank, and orders were also sent for general
blair, with the seventeenth corps, to come to the same destination.
meantime the sound of cannon came from the direction of
bentonsville.
the night of the th caught us near falling-creek church; but
early the next morning the fifteenth corps, general c. r. woods's
division leading, closed down on bentonsville, near which it was
brought up by encountering a line of fresh parapet, crossing the
road and extending north, toward mill creek.
after deploying, i ordered general howard to proceed with due
caution, using skirmishers alone, till he had made junction with
general slocum, on his left. these deployments occupied all day,
during which two divisions of the seventeenth corps also got up. at
that time general johnston's army occupied the form of a v, the
angle reaching the road leading from averysboro' to goldsboro', and
the flanks resting on mill creek, his lines embracing the village
of bentonsville.
general slocum's wing faced one of these lines and general
howard's the other; and, in the uncertainty of general johnston's
strength, i did not feel disposed to invite a general battle, for
we had been out from savannah since the latter part of january, and
our wagon-trains contained but little food. i had also received
messages during the day from general schofield, at kinston, and
general terry, at faison's depot, approaching goldsboro', both
expecting to reach it by march st. during the th we simply held
our ground and started our trains back to kinston for provisions,
which would be needed in the event of being forced to fight a
general battle at bentonsville. the next day (st) it began to
rain again, and we remained quiet till about noon, when general
mower, ever rash, broke through the rebel line on his extreme left
flank, and was pushing straight for bentonsville and the bridge
across mill creek. i ordered him back to connect with his own
corps; and, lest the enemy should concentrate on him, ordered the
whole rebel line to be engaged with a strong skirmish-fire.
i think i made a mistake there, and should rapidly have followed
mower's lead with the whole of the right wing, which would have
brought on a general battle, and it could not have resulted
otherwise than successfully to us, by reason of our vastly superior
numbers; but at the moment, for the reasons given, i preferred to
make junction with generals terry and schofield, before engaging
johnston's army, the strength of which was utterly unknown. the
next day he was gone, and had retreated on smithfield; and, the
roads all being clear, our army moved to goldsboro'. the heaviest
fighting at bentonsville was on the first day, viz., the th, when
johnston's army struck the head of slocum's columns, knocking back
carlin's division; but, as soon as general slocum had brought up
the rest of the fourteenth corps into line, and afterward the
twentieth on its left, he received and repulsed all attacks, and
held his ground as ordered, to await the coming back of the right
wing. his loss, as reported, was nine officers and one hundred and
forty-five men killed, eight hundred and sixteen wounded, and two
hundred and twenty-six missing. he reported having buried of the
rebel dead one hundred and sixty-seven, and captured three hundred
and thirty-eight prisoners.
the loss of the right wing was two officers and thirty-five men
killed, twelve officers and two hundred and eighty-nine men
wounded, and seventy missing. general howard reported that he had
buried one hundred of the rebel dead, and had captured twelve
hundred and eighty-seven prisoners.
our total loss, therefore, at bentonsville was: ,
general johnston, in his "narrative" (p. ), asserts that his
entire force at bentonsville, omitting wheeler's and butler's
cavalry, only amounted to fourteen thousand one hundred infantry
and artillery; and (p. ) states his losses as: ,
wide discrepancies exist in these figures: for instance, general
slocum accounts for three hundred and thirty-eight prisoners
captured, and general howard for twelve hundred and eighty-seven,
making sixteen hundred and twenty-five in all, to johnston's six
hundred and fifty three--a difference of eight hundred and
seventy-two. i have always accorded to general johnston due credit
for boldness in his attack on our exposed flank at bentonville, but
i think he understates his strength, and doubt whether at the time
he had accurate returns from his miscellaneous army, collected from
hoke, bragg, hardee, lee, etc. after the first attack on carlin's
division, i doubt if the fighting was as desperate as described by
him, p. , et seq. i was close up with the fifteenth corps, on
the th and st, considered the fighting as mere skirmishing, and
know that my orders were to avoid a general battle, till we could
be sure of goldsboro', and of opening up a new base of supply. with
the knowledge now possessed of his small force, of course i
committed an error in not overwhelming johnston's army on the st
of march, . but i was content then to let him go, and on the
d of march rode to cog's bridge, where i met general terry, with
his two divisions of the tenth corps; and the next day we rode into
goldsboro', where i found general schofield with the twenty-third
corps, thus effecting a perfect junction of all the army at that
point, as originally contemplated. during the d and th the
whole army was assembled at goldsboro'; general terry's two
divisions encamped at faison's depot to the south, and general
kilpatrick's cavalry at mount olive station, near him, and there we
all rested, while i directed my special attention to replenishing
the army for the next and last stage of the campaign. colonel w. w.
wright had been so indefatigable, that the newbern railroad was
done, and a locomotive arrived in goldsboro' on the th of
march.
thus was concluded one of the longest and most important marches
ever made by an organized army in a civilized country. the distance
from savannah to goldsboro' is four hundred and twenty-five miles,
and the route traversed embraced five large navigable rivers, viz.,
the edisto, broad, catawba, pedee, and cape fear, at either of
which a comparatively small force, well-handled, should have made
the passage most difficult, if not impossible. the country
generally was in a state of nature, with innumerable swamps, with
simply mud roads, nearly every mile of which had to be corduroyed.
in our route we had captured columbia, cheraw, and fayetteville,
important cities and depots of supplies, had compelled the
evacuation of charleston city and harbor, had utterly broken up all
the railroads of south carolina, and had consumed a vast amount of
food and forage, essential to the enemy for the support of his own
armies. we had in mid-winter accomplished the whole journey of four
hundred and twenty-five miles in fifty days, averaging ten miles
per day, allowing ten lay-days, and had reached goldsboro' with the
army in superb order, and the trains almost as fresh as when we had
started from atlanta.
it was manifest to me that we could resume our march, and come
within the theatre of general grant's field of operations in all
april, and that there was no force in existence that could delay
our progress, unless general lee should succeed in eluding general
grant at petersburg, make junction with general johnston, and thus
united meet me alone; and now that we had effected a junction with
generals terry and schofield, i had no fear even of that event. on
reaching goldsboro, i learned from general schofield all the
details of his operations about wilmington and newbern; also of the
fight of the twenty-third corps about kinston, with general bragg.
i also found lieutenant dunn, of general grant's staff, awaiting
me, with the general's letter of february th, covering
instructions to generals schofield and thomas; and his letter of
march th, in answer to mine of the th, from fayetteville.
these are all given here to explain the full reasons for the
events of the war then in progress, with two or three letters from
myself, to fill out the picture.
city point, virginia, february , 
major-general w. t. sherman, commanding military division of the
mississippi.
general: without much expectation of it reaching you in time to be
of any service, i have mailed to you copies of instructions to
schofield and thomas. i had informed schofield by telegraph of the
departure of mahone's division, south from the petersburg front.
these troops marched down the weldon road, and, as they apparently
went without baggage, it is doubtful whether they have not
returned. i was absent from here when they left. just returned
yesterday morning from cape fear river. i went there to determine
where schofield's corps had better go to operate against wilmington
and goldsboro'. the instructions with this will inform you of the
conclusion arrived at.
schofield was with me, and the plan of the movement against
wilmington fully determined before we started back; hence the
absence of more detailed instructions to him. he will land one
division at smithville, and move rapidly up the south side of the
river, and secure the wilmington & charlotte railroad, and with
his pontoon train cross over to the island south of the city, if he
can. with the aid of the gunboats, there is no doubt but this move
will drive the enemy from their position eight miles east of the
city, either back to their line or away altogether. there will be a
large force on the north bank of cape fear river, ready to follow
up and invest the garrison, if they should go inside.
the railroads of north carolina are four feet eight and one-half
inches gauge. i have sent large parties of railroad-men there to
build them up, and have ordered stock to run them. we have
abundance of it idle from the non-use of the virginia roads. i have
taken every precaution to have supplies ready for you wherever you
may turn up. i did this before when you left atlanta, and regret
that they did not reach you promptly when you reached
salt-water....
alexander stephens, r. m. t. hunter, and judge campbell, are now at
my headquarters, very desirous of going to washington to see mr.
lincoln, informally, on the subject of peace. the peace feeling
within the rebel lines is gaining ground rapidly. this, however,
should not relax our energies in the least, but should stimulate us
to greater activity.
i have received your very kind letters, in which you say you would
decline, or are opposed to, promotion. no one world be more pleased
at your advancement than i, and if you should be placed in my
position, and i put subordinate, it would not change our personal
relations in the least. i would make the same exertions to support
you that you have ever done to support me, and would do all in my
power to make our cause win.
yours truly,
u. s. grant, lieutenant-general.
city point, virginia, january , .
major-general g. h. thomas, commanding army of the
cumberland.
general: with this i send you a letter from general sherman. at the
time of writing it, general sherman was not informed of the
depletion of your command by my orders. it will, be impossible at
present for you to move south as he contemplated, with the force of
infantry indicated. general slocum is advised before this of the
changes made, and that for the winter you will be on the defensive.
i think, however, an expedition from east tennessee, under general
stoneman might penetrate south carolina, well down toward columbia,
destroying the railroad and military resources of the country, thus
visiting a portion of the state which will not be reached by
sherman's forces. he might also be able to return to east tennessee
by way of salisbury, north carolina, thus releasing home our
prisoners of war in rebel hands.
of the practicability of doing this, general stoneman will have to
be the judge, making up his mind from information obtained while
executing the first part of his instructions. sherman's movements
will attract the attention of all the force the enemy can collect,
thus facilitating the execution of this.
three thousand cavalry would be a sufficient force to take. this
probably can be raised in the old department of the ohio, without
taking any now under general wilson. it would require, though, the
reorganization of the two regiments of kentucky cavalry, which
stoneman had in his very successful raid into southwestern
virginia.
it will be necessary, probably, for you to send, in addition to the
force now in east tennessee, a small division of infantry, to
enable general gillem to hold the upper end of holston valley, and
the mountain-passes in rear of stevenson.
you may order such an expedition. to save time, i will send a copy
of this to general stoneman, so that he can begin his preparations
without loss of time, and can commence his correspondence with you
as to these preparations.
as this expedition goes to destroy and not to fight battles, but to
avoid them when practicable, particularly against any thing like
equal forces, or where a great object is to be gained, it should go
as light as possible. stoneman's experience, in raiding will teach
him in this matter better than he can be directed.
let there be no delay in the preparations for this expedition, and
keep me advised of its progress. very respectfully, your obedient
servant,
u. s. grant, lieutenant-general.
city point, virginia, january , .
major-general j. m. schofield, commanding army of the ohio.
general: i have requested by telegraph that, for present purposes,
north carolina be erected into a department, and that you be placed
in command of it, subject to major-general sherman's orders. of
course, you will receive orders from me direct until such time as
general sherman gets within communicating distance of you. this
obviates the necessity of my publishing the order which i informed
you would meet you at fortress monroe. if the order referred to
should not be published from the adjutant-general's office, you
will read these instructions as your authority to assume command of
all the troops in north carolina, dating all official
communications, "headquarters army of the ohio." your headquarters
will be in the field, and with the portion of the army where you
feel yourself most needed. in the first move you will go to cape
fear river.
your movements are intended as cooperative with sherman's movement
through the states of south and north carolina. the first point to
be obtained is to secure wilmington. goldsboro' will then be your
objective point, moving either from wilmington or newbern, or both,
as you may deem best. should you not be able to reach goldsboro',
you will advance on the line or lines of railway connecting that
place with the sea-coast, as near to it as you can, building the
road behind you. the enterprise under you has two objects: the
first is, to give general sherman material aid, if needed, in his
march north; the second, to open a base of supplies for him on the
line of his march. as soon, therefore, as you can determine which
of the two points, wilmington or newbern, you can best use for
throwing supplies from to the interior, you will commence the
accumulation of twenty days rations and forage for sixty thousand
men and twenty thousand animals. you will get of these as many as
you can house and protect, to such point in the interior as you may
be able to occupy.
i believe general innis n. palmer has received some instructions
directly from general sherman, on the subject of securing supplies
for his army. you can learn what steps he has taken, and be
governed in your requisitions accordingly. a supply of
ordnance-stores will also be necessary.
make all your requisitions upon the chiefs of their respective
departments, in the field, with me at city point. communicate with
me by every opportunity, and, should you deem it necessary at any
time, send a special boat to fortress monroe, from which point you
can communicate by telegraph.
the supplies referred to in these instructions are exclusive of
those required by your own command.
the movements of the enemy may justify you, or even make it your
imperative duty, to cut loose from your base and strike for the
interior, to aid sherman. in such case you will act on your own
judgment, without waiting for instructions. you will report,
however, what you propose doing. the details for carrying out these
instructions are necessarily left to you. i would urge, however, if
i did not know that you are already fully alive to the importance
of it, prompt action. sherman may be looked for in the neighborhood
of goldsboro' any time from the d to the th of february. this
limits your time very materially.
if rolling-stock is not secured in the capture of wilmington, it
can be supplied from washington: a large force of railroad-men has
already been sent to beaufort, and other mechanics will go to fort
fisher in a day or two. on this point i have informed you by
telegraph.
very respectfully, your obedient servant,
u. s. grant, lieutenant-general.
city point, virginia, march , .
major-general w. t. sherman, commanding military division of the
mississippi.
general: your interesting letter of the th inst. is just
received. i have never felt any uneasiness for your safety, but i
have felt great anxiety to know just how you were progressing. i
knew, or thought i did, that, with the magnificent army with you,
you would come out safely somewhere.
to secure certain success, i deemed the capture of wilmington of
the greatest importance. butler came near losing that prize to us.
but terry and schofield have since retrieved his blunders, and i do
not know but the first failure has been as valuable a success for
the country as the capture of fort fisher. butler may not see it in
that light.
ever since you started on the last campaign, and before, i have
been attempting to get something done in the west, both to
cooperate with you and to take advantage of the enemy's weakness
there--to accomplish results favorable to us. knowing thomas to be
slow beyond excuse, i depleted his army to reinforce canby, so that
he might act from mobile bay on the interior. with all i have said,
he has not moved at last advices. canby was sending a cavalry
force, of about seven thousand, from vicksburg toward selma. i
ordered thomas to send wilson from eastport toward the same point,
and to get him off as soon after the th of february as possible.
he telegraphed me that he would be off by that date. he has not yet
started, or had not at last advices. i ordered him to send stoneman
from east tennessee into northwest south carolina, to be there
about the time you would reach columbia. he would either have drawn
off the enemy's cavalry from you, or would have succeeded in
destroying railroads, supplies, and other material, which you could
not reach. at that time the richmond papers were full of the
accounts of your movements, and gave daily accounts of movements in
west north carolina. i supposed all the time it was stoneman. you
may judge my surprise when i afterward learned that stoneman was
still in louisville, kentucky, and that the troops in north
carolina were kirk's forces! in order that stoneman might get off
without delay, i told thomas that three thousand men would be
sufficient for him to take. in the mean time i had directed
sheridan to get his cavalry ready, and, as soon as the snow in the
mountains melted sufficiently, to start for staunton, and go on and
destroy the virginia central railroad and canal. time advanced,
until he set the th of february for starting. i informed thomas,
and directed him to change the course of stoneman toward lynchburg,
to destroy the road in virginia up as near to that place as
possible. not hearing from thomas, i telegraphed to him about the
th, to know if stoneman was yet off. he replied not, but that he
(thomas) would start that day for knoxville, to get him off as soon
as possible.
sheridan has made his raid, and with splendid success, so far as
heard. i am looking for him at "white house" to-day. since about
the th of last month the richmond papers have been prohibited
from publishing accounts of army movements. we are left to our own
resources, therefore, for information. you will see from the papers
what sheridan has done; if you do not, the officer who bears this
will tell you all.
lee has depleted his army but very little recently, and i learn of
none going south. some regiments may have been detached, but i
think no division or brigade. the determination seems to be to hold
richmond as long as possible. i have a force sufficient to leave
enough to hold our lines (all that is necessary of them), and move
out with plenty to whip his whole army. but the roads are entirely
impassable. until they improve, i shall content myself with
watching lee, and be prepared to pitch into him if he attempts to
evacuate the place. i may bring sheridan over--think i will--and
break up the danville and southside railroads. these are the last
avenues left to the enemy.
recruits have come in so rapidly at the west that thomas has now
about as much force as he had when he attacked hood. i have stopped
all who, under previous orders, would go to him, except those from
illinois.
fearing the possibility of the enemy falling back to lynchburg, and
afterward attempting to go into east tennessee or kentucky, i have
ordered thomas to move the fourth corps to bull's gap, and to
fortify there, and to hold out to the virginia line, if he can. he
has accumulated a large amount of supplies in knoxville, and has
been ordered not to destroy any of the railroad west of the
virginia hue. i told him to get ready for a campaign toward
lynchburg, if it became necessary. he never can make one there or
elsewhere; but the steps taken will prepare for any one else to
take his troops and come east or go toward rome, whichever may be
necessary. i do not believe either will.
when i hear that you and schofield are together, with your back
upon the coast, i shall feel that you are entirely safe against any
thing the enemy can do. lee may evacuate richmond, but he cannot
get there with force enough to touch you. his army is now
demoralized and deserting very fast, both to us and to their homes.
a retrograde movement would cost him thousands of men, even if we
did not follow.
five thousand men, belonging to the corps with you, are now on
their way to join you. if more reenforcements are necessary, i will
send them. my notion is, that you should get raleigh as soon as
possible, and hold the railroad from there back. this may take more
force than you now have.
from that point all north carolina roads can be made useless to the
enemy, without keeping up communications with the rear.
hoping to hear soon of your junction with the forces from
wilmington and newborn, i remain, very respectfully, your obedient
servant,
u. s. grant, lieutenant-general.
cox's brigade, neuse river, north carolina, march , 
lieutenant-general u. s. grant, commander-in-chief, city point,
virginia.
general: i wrote you from fayetteville, north carolina, on tuesday,
the th instant, that i was all ready to start for goldsboro', to
which point i had also ordered general schofield, from newborn, and
general terry, from wilmington. i knew that general jos. johnston
was supreme in command against me, and that he would have time to
concentrate a respectable army to oppose the last stage of this
march. accordingly, general slocum was ordered to send his main
supply-train, under escort of two divisions, straight for
bentonsville, while he, with his other four divisions,
disencumbered of all unnecessary wagons, should march toward
raleigh, by way of threat, as far as averysboro'. general howard,
in like manner, sent his trains with the seventeenth corps, well to
the right, and, with the four divisions of the fifteenth corps,
took roads which would enable him to come promptly to the exposed
left flank. we started on the th, but again the rains set in, and
the roads, already bad enough, became horrible.
on tuesday, the th, general slocum found hardee's army, from
charleston, which had retreated before us from cheraw, in position
across the narrow, swampy neck between cape fear and north rivers,
where the road branches off to goldsboro'. there a pretty severe
fight occurred, in which general slocum's troops carried handsomely
the advanced line, held by a south carolina brigade, commanded by a
colonel butler. its commander, colonel rhett, of fort sumter
notoriety, with one of his staff, had the night before been
captured, by kilpatrick's scouts, from his very skirmish-line. the
next morning hardee was found gone, and was pursued through and
beyond averysboro'. general slocum buried one hundred and eight
dead rebels, and captured and destroyed three guns. some eighty
wounded rebels were left in our hands, and, after dressing their
wounds, we left them in a house, attended by a confederate officer
and four privates, detailed out of our prisoners and paroled for
the purpose.
we resumed the march toward goldsboro'. i was with the left wing
until i supposed all danger had passed; but, when general slocum's
head of column was within four miles of bentonsville, after
skirmishing as usual with cavalry, he became aware that there was
infantry in his front. he deployed a couple of brigades, which, on
advancing, sustained a partial repulse, but soon rallied, when he
formed a line of the two leading divisions (morgan's and carlin's)
of jeff. c. davis's corps. the enemy attacked these with violence,
but was repulsed. this was in the forenoon of sunday, the th.
general slocum brought forward the two divisions of the twentieth
corps, hastily disposed of them for defense, and general kilpatrick
massed his cavalry on the left.
general jos. johnston had, the night before, marched his whole army
(bragg, cheatham, s. d. lee, hardee, and all the troops he had
drawn from every quarter), determined, as he told his men, to crash
one of our corps, and then defeat us in detail. he attacked general
slocum in position from  p. m. on the th till dark; but was
everywhere repulsed, and lost heavily. at the time, i was with the
fifteenth corps, marching on a road more to the right; but, on
hearing of general slocum's danger, directed that corps toward
cox's bridge, in the night brought blair's corps over, and on the
th marched rapidly on johnston's flank and rear. we struck him
about noon, forced him to assume the defensive, and to fortify.
yesterday we pushed him hard, and came very near crushing him, the
right division of the seventeenth corps (mower's) having broken in
to within a hundred yards of where johnston himself was, at the
bridge across mill creek. last night he retreated, leaving us in
possession of the field, dead, and wounded. we have over two
thousand prisoners from this affair and the one at averysboro', and
i am satisfied that johnston's army was so roughly handled
yesterday that we could march right on to raleigh; but we have now
been out six weeks, living precariously upon the collections of our
foragers, our men dirty, ragged, and saucy, and we must rest and
fix up a little. our entire losses thus far (killed, wounded, and
prisoners) will be covered by twenty-five hundred, a great part of
which are, as usual, slight wounds. the enemy has lost more than
double as many, and we have in prisoners alone full two
thousand.
i limited the pursuit, this morning, to mill creek, and will
forthwith march the army to goldsboro', there to rest, reclothe,
and get some rations.
our combinations were such that general schofield entered
goldsboro' from newborn; general terry got cox's bridge, with
pontoons laid, and a brigade across neuse river intrenched; and we
whipped jos. johnston--all on the same day.
after riding over the field of battle to-day, near bentonsville,
and making the necessary orders, i have ridden down to this place
(cox's bridge) to see general terry, and to-morrow shall ride into
goldsboro.
i propose to collect there my army proper; shall post general terry
about faison's depot, and general schofield about kinston, partly
to protect the road, but more to collect such food and forage as
the country affords, until the railroads are repaired leading into
goldsboro'.
i fear these have not been pushed with the vigor i had expected;
but i will soon have them both going. i shall proceed at once to
organize three armies of twenty-five thousand men each, and will
try and be all ready to march to raleigh or weldon, as we may
determine, by or before april th.
i inclose you a copy of my orders of to-day. i would like to be
more specific, but have not the data. we have lost no general
officers nor any organization. general slocum took three guns at
averysboro', and lost three others at the first dash on him at
bentonsville. we have all our wagons and trains in good
order.
yours truly,
w. t. sherman, major-general.
cox's brigade, goldsboro', north carolina, march , .
lieutenant-general u. s. grant, commanding the armies of the united
states, city point, virginia.
general: on reaching goldsboro' this morning, i found lieutenant
dunn awaiting me with your letter of march th and dispatch of the
th. i wrote you fully from cox's bridge yesterday, and since
reaching goldsboro' have learned that my letter was sent punctually
to newborn, whence it will be dispatched to you.
i am very glad to hear that general sheridan did such good service
between richmond and lynchburg, and hope he will keep the ball
moving, i know that these raids and dashes disconcert our enemy and
discourage him much.
general slocum's two corps (fourteenth and twentieth) are now
coming in. i will dispose of them north of goldsboro', between the
weldon road and little river. general howard to-day is marching
south of the nenae, and to-morrow will come in and occupy ground
north of goldsboro', extending from the weldon railroad to that
leading to kinston.
i have ordered all the provisional divisions, made up of troops
belonging to the regular corps, to be broken up, and the men to
join their proper regiments and organizations; and have ordered
general schofield to guard the railroads back to newborn and
wilmington, and to make up a movable column equal to twenty-five
thousand men, with which to take the field. his army will be the
centre, as on the atlanta campaign. i do not think i want any more
troops (other than absentees and recruits) to fill up the present
regiments, and i can make up an army of eighty thousand men by
april th. i will post general kilpatrick at mount olive station
on the wilmington road, and then allow the army some rest.
we have sent all our empty wagons, under escort, with the proper
staff-officers, to bring up from kinston clothing and provisions.
as long as we move we can gather food and forage; but, the moment
we stop, trouble begins.
i feel sadly disappointed that our railroads are not done. i do not
like to say there has been any neglect until i make inquiries; but
it does seem to me the repairs should have been made ere this, and
the road properly stocked. i can only hear of one locomotive
(besides the four old ones) on the newbern road, and two damaged
locomotives (found by general terry) on the wilmington road. i left
generals easton and beckwith purposely to make arrangements in
anticipation of my arrival, and have heard from neither, though i
suppose them both to be at morehead city.
at all events, we have now made a junction of all the armies, and
if we can maintain them, will, in a short time, be in a position to
march against raleigh, gaston, weldon, or even richmond, as you may
determine.
if i get the troops all well planed, and the supplies working well,
i may run up to see you for a day or two before diving again into
the bowels of the country.
i will make, in a very short time, accurate reports of our
operations for the past two months. yours truly,
w. t. sherman, major-general commanding.
cox's brigade, goldsboro', north carolina, march , .
lieutenant-general u. s. grant, city point, virginia.
general: i have kept lieutenant dunn over to-day that i might
report farther. all the army is now in, save the cavalry (which i
have posted at mount olive station, south of the nenae) and general
terry's command (which--to-morrow will move from cog's ferry to
faison's depot, also on the wilmington road). i send you a copy of
my orders of this morning, the operation of which will, i think,
soon complete our roads. the telegraph is now done to morehead
city, and by it i learn that stores have been sent to kinston in
boats, and that our wagons are loading with rations and clothing.
by using the neuse as high up as kinston, hauling from there
twenty-six miles, and by equipping the two roads to morehead city
and wilmington, i feel certain we can not only feed and equip the
army, but in a short time fill our wagons for another start. i feel
certain, from the character of the fighting, that we have got
johnston's army afraid of us. he himself acts with timidity and
caution. his cavalry alone manifests spirit, but limits its
operations to our stragglers and foraging-parties. my marching
columns of infantry do not pay the cavalry any attention, but walk
right through it.
i think i see pretty clearly how, in one more move, we can
checkmate lee, forcing him to unite johnston with him in the
defense of richmond, or to abandon the cause. i feel certain, if he
leaves richmond, virginia leaves the confederacy. i will study my
maps a little more before giving my positive views. i want all
possible information of the roanoke as to navigability, how far up,
and with what draught.
we find the country sandy, dry, with good roads, and more corn and
forage than i had expected. the families remain, but i will
gradually push them all out to raleigh or wilmington. we will need
every house in the town. lieutenant dunn can tell you of many
things of which i need not write. yours truly,
w. t. sherman, major-general.
cox's brigade, goldsboro', north carolina, april ,
major-general george h. thomas, commanding department of the
cumberland.
dear general: i can hardly help smiling when i contemplate my
command--it is decidedly mixed. i believe, but am not certain, that
you are in my jurisdiction, but i certainly cannot help you in the
way of orders or men; nor do i think you need either. general cruft
has just arrived with his provisional division, which will at once
be broken up and the men sent to their proper regiments, as that of
meagher was on my arrival here.
you may have some feeling about my asking that general slocum
should have command of the two corps that properly belong to you,
viz., the fourteenth and twentieth, but you can recall that he was
but a corps commander, and could not legally make orders of
discharge, transfer, etc., which was imperatively necessary. i
therefore asked that general slocum should be assigned to command
"an army in the field," called the army of georgia, composed of the
fourteenth and twentieth corps. the order is not yet made by the
president, though i have recognized it because both, general grant
and the president have sanctioned it, and promised to have the
order made.
my army is now here, pretty well clad and provided, divided into
three parts, of two corps each--much as our old atlanta army
was.
i expect to move on in a few days, and propose (if lee remains in
richmond) to pass the roanoke, and open communication with the
chowan and norfolk. this will bring me in direct communication with
general grant.
this is an admirable point--country open, and the two railroads in
good order back to wilmington and beaufort. we have already brought
up stores enough to fill our wagons, and only await some few
articles, and the arrival of some men who are marching up from the
coast, to be off.
general grant explained to me his orders to you, which, of course,
are all right. you can make reports direct to washington or to
general grant, but keep me advised occasionally of the general
state of affairs, that i may know what is happening. i must give my
undivided attention to matters here. you will hear from a thousand
sources pretty fair accounts of our next march. yours truly,
w. t. sherman, major-general.
flag-ship philadelphia, charleston, april , 
major-general w. t. sherman, commanding armies of the tennessee,
georgia, and mississippi.
mr dear general: i was much gratified by a sight of your
handwriting, which has just reached me from goldsboro'; it was very
suggestive of a past to me, when these regions were the scene of
your operations.
as you progressed through south carolina, there was no
manifestation of weakness or of an intention to abandon charleston,
until within a few hours of the fact. on the th of february i was
at stono, and a spirited demonstration was made by general
schimmel-pfennig and the vessels. he drove the rebels from their
rifle-pits in front of the lines, extending from fort pringle, and
pushed them vigorously. the next day i was at bull's bay, with a
dozen steamers, among them the finest of the squadron. general
potter had twelve to fifteen hundred men, the object being to carry
out your views. we made as much fuss as possible, and with better
success than i anticipated, for it seems that the rebs conceived
stono to be a feint, and the real object at bull's bay, supposing,
from the number of steamers and boats, that we had several thousand
men. now came an aide from general gillmore, at port royal, with
your cipher-dispatch from midway, so i steamed down to port royal
to see him. next day was spent in vain efforts to decipher-finally
it was accomplished. you thought that the state of the roads might
force you to turn upon charleston; so i went there on the th, but
there was no sign yet of flinching. then i went to bull's bay next
day (th), and found that the troops were not yet ashore, owing to
the difficulties of shoal water. one of the gunboats had contrived
to get up to within shelling range, and both soldiers and sailors
were working hard. on the evening of the th i steamed down to
stono to see how matters were going there. passing charleston, i
noticed two large fires, well inside--probably preparing to leave.
on the th, in stono, rumors were flying about loose of
evacuation. in course of the morning, general schimmelpfennig
telegraphed me, from morris island, that there were symptoms of
leaving; that he would again make a push at stono, and asked for
monitors. general schimmelpfennig came down in the afternoon, and
we met in the folly branch, near secessionville. he was sore that
the rebs would be off that night, so he was to assault them in
front, while a monitor and gunboats stung their flanks both sides.
i also sent an aide to order my battery of five eleven-inch guns,
at cumming's point, to fire steadily all night on sullivan's
island, and two monitors to close up to the island for the same
object. next morning (th) the rascals were found to be off, and
we broke in from all directions, by land and water. the main bodies
had left at eight or nine in the evening, leaving detachments to
keep up a fire from the batteries. i steamed round quickly, and
soon got into the city, threading the streets with a large group of
naval captains who had joined me. all was silent as the grave. no
one to be seen but a few firemen.
no one can question the excellence of your judgment in taking the
track you did, and i never had any misgivings, but it was natural
to desire to go into the place with a strong hand, for, if any one
spot in the land was foremost in the trouble, it was
charleston.
your campaign was the final blow, grand in conception, complete in
execution; and now it is yours to secure the last army which
rebeldom possesses. i hear of your being in motion by the th, and
hope that the result may be all that you wish.
tidings of the murder of the president have just come, and shocked
every mind. can it be that such a resort finds root in any stratum
of american opinion? evidently it has not been the act of one man,
nor of a madman. who have prompted him?
i am grateful for your remembrance of my boy; the thought of him is
ever nearest to my heart. generous, brave, and noble, as i ever
knew him to be, that he should close his young life so early, even
under the accepted conditions of a soldier's life, as a son of the
union, would have been grief sufficient for me to bear; but that
his precious remains should have been so treated by the brutes into
whose hands they fell, adds even to the bitterness of death. i am
now awaiting the hour when i can pay my last duties to his
memory.
with my best and sincere wishes, my dear general, for your success
and happiness, i am, most truly, your friend,
[general order no. .]
washington, march , 
ordered--. that at the hour of noon, on the th day of april,
, brevet major-general anderson will raise and plant upon the
ruins of fort sumter, in charleston harbor, the same united states
flag which floated over the battlements of that fort during the
rebel assault, and which was lowered and saluted by him and the
small force of his command when the works were evacuated on the
th day of april, .
. that the flag, when raised, be saluted by one hundred guns from
fort sumter, and by a national salute from every fort and rebel
battery that fired upon fort sumter.
. that suitable ceremonies be had upon the occasion, under the
direction of major-general william t. sherman, whose military
operations compelled the rebels to evacuate charleston, or, in his
absence, under the charge of major-general q. a. gilmore,
commanding the department. among the ceremonies will be the
delivery of a public address by the rev. henry ward beecher.
. that the naval forces at charleston, and their commander on that
station, be invited to participate in the ceremonies of the
occasion.
by order of the president of the united states,
edwin m. stanton, secretary of war.
[general order no. .]
hilton head, south carolina, april , 
friday next, the th inst., will be the fourth anniversary of the
capture of fort sumter by the rebels. a befitting celebration on
that day, in honor of its reoccupation by the national forces, has
been ordered by the president, in pursuance of which brevet
major-general robert anderson, united states army, will restore to
its original place on the fort the identical flag which, after an
honorable and gallant defense, he was compelled to lower to the
insurgents in south carolina, in april, .
the ceremonies for the occasion will commence with prayer, at
thirty minutes past eleven o'clock a.m.
at noon precisely, the flag will be raised and saluted with one
hundred guns from fort sumter, and with a national salute from fort
moultrie and battery bee on sullivan's island, fort putnam on
morris island, and fort johnson on james's island; it being
eminently appropriate that the places which were so conspicuous in
the inauguration of the rebellion should take a part not less
prominent in this national rejoicing over the restoration of the
national authority.
after the salutes, the rev. henry ward beecher will deliver an
address.
the ceremonies will close with prayer and a benediction.
colonel stewart l. woodford, chief of staff, under such verbal
instructions as he may receive, is hereby charged with the details
of the celebration, comprising all the arrangements that it may be
necessary to make for the accommodation of the orator of the day,
and the comfort and safety of the invited guests from the army and
navy, and from civil life.
by command of major-general q. a. gillmore,
w. l. m. burger, assistant adjutant-general.
copy of major anderson's dispatch, announcing the surrender of fort
sumter, april , .
april , , . a.m. via new york
honorable s. cameron, secretary of war, washington
having defended fort sumter for thirty-four hours, until the
quarters were entirely burned, the main gates destroyed by fire,
the gorge-walls seriously injured, the magazine surrounded by
flames, and its door closed from the effect of heat, four barrels
and three cartridges of powder only being available, and no
provisions remaining but pork, i accepted terms of evacuation
offered by general beauregard, being the same offered by him on the
th inst., prior to the commencement of hostilities, and marched
out of the fort, sunday afternoon, the th inst., with colors
flying and drums beating, bringing away company and private
property, and saluting my flag with fifty guns.
robert anderson, major first artillery, commanding.
as before described, the armies commanded respectively by
generals j. m. schofield, a. h. terry, and myself, effected a
junction in and about goldsboro', north carolina, during the d
and d of march, , but it required a few days for all the
troops and trains of wagons to reach their respective camps. in
person i reached goldsboro' on the d, and met general schofield,
who described fully his operations in north carolina up to that
date; and i also found lieutenant dunn, aide-de-camp to general
grant, with a letter from him of march th, giving a general
description of the state of facts about city point. the next day i
received another letter, more full, dated the d, which i give
herewith.
nevertheless, i deemed it of great importance that i should have
a personal interview with the general, and determined to go in
person to city point as soon as the repairs of the railroad, then
in progress under the personal direction of colonel w. w. wright,
would permit:
virginia, march , 
major-general sherman, commanding military division of the
mississippi.
general: although the richmond papers do not communicate the fact,
yet i saw enough in them to satisfy me that you occupied goldsboro'
on the th inst. i congratulate you and the army on what may be
regarded as the successful termination of the third campaign since
leaving the tennessee river, less than one year ago.
since sheridan's very successful raid north of the james, the enemy
are left dependent on the southside and danville roads for all
their supplies. these i hope to cut next week. sheridan is at white
house, "shoeing up" and resting his cavalry. i expect him to finish
by friday night and to start the following morning, raid long
bridge, newmarket, bermuda hundred, and the extreme left of the
army around petersburg. he will make no halt with the armies
operating here, but will be joined by a division of cavalry, five
thousand five hundred strong, from the army of the potomac, and
will proceed directly to the southside and danville roads. his
instructions will be to strike the southside road as near
petersburg as he can, and destroy it so that it cannot be repaired
for three or four days, and push on to the danville road, as near
to the appomattox as he can get. then i want him to destroy the
road toward burkesville as far as he can; then push on to the
southside road, west of burkesville, and destroy it effectually.
from that point i shall probably leave it to his discretion either
to return to this army, crossing the danville road south of
burkesville, or go and join you, passing between danville and
greensboro'. when this movement commences i shall move out by my
left, with all the force i can, holding present intrenched lines. i
shall start with no distinct view, further than holding lee's
forces from following sheridan. but i shall be along myself, and
will take advantage of any thing that turns up. if lee detaches, i
will attack; or if he comes out of his lines i will endeavor to
repulse him, and follow it up to the best advantage.
it is most difficult to understand what the rebels intend to do; so
far but few troops have been detached from lee's army. much
machinery has been removed, and material has been sent to
lynchburg, showing a disposition to go there. points, too, have
been fortified on the danville road.
lee's army is much demoralized, and great numbers are deserting.
probably, from returned prisoners, and such conscripts as can be
picked up, his numbers may be kept up. i estimate his force now at
about sixty-five thousand men.
wilson started on monday, with twelve thousand cavalry, from
eastport. stoneman started on the same day, from east tennessee,
toward lynchburg. thomas is moving the fourth corps to bull's gap.
canby is moving with a formidable force on mobile and the interior
of alabama.
i ordered gilmore, as soon as the fall of charleston was known, to
hold all important posts on the sea-coast, and to send to
wilmington all surplus forces. thomas was also directed to forward
to newbern all troops belonging to the corps with you. i understand
this will give you about five thousand men, besides those brought
east by meagher.
i have been telegraphing general meigs to hasten up locomotives and
cars for you. general mccallum, he informs me, is attending to it.
i fear they are not going forward as fast as i world like.
let me know if you want more troops, or any thing else.
very respectfully, your obedient servant,
u. s. grant, lieutenant-general.
the railroad was repaired to goldsboro' by the evening of march
th, when, leaving general schofield in chief command, with a
couple of staff-officers i started for city point, virginia, in a
locomotive, in company with colonel wright, the constructing
engineer. we reached newbern that evening, which was passed in the
company of general palmer and his accomplished lady, and early the
next morning we continued on to morehead city, where general easton
had provided for us the small captured steamer russia, captain
smith. we put to sea at once and steamed up the coast, reaching
fortress monroe on the morning of the th, where i landed and
telegraphed to my brother, senator sherman, at washington, inviting
him to come down and return with me to goldsboro. we proceeded on
up james river to city point, which we reached the same afternoon.
i found general grant, with his family and staff, occupying a
pretty group of huts on the bank of james river, overlooking the
harbor, which was full of vessels of all classes, both war and
merchant, with wharves and warehouses on an extensive scale. the
general received me most heartily, and we talked over matters very
fully. after i had been with him an hour or so, he remarked that
the president, mr. lincoln, was then on board the steamer river
queen, lying at the wharf, and he proposed that we should call and
see him. we walked down to the wharf, went on board, and found mr.
lincoln alone, in the after-cabin. he remembered me perfectly, and
at once engaged in a most interesting conversation. he was full of
curiosity about the many incidents of our great march, which had
reached him officially and through the newspapers, and seemed to
enjoy very much the more ludicrous parts-about the "bummers," and
their devices to collect food and forage when the outside world
supposed us to be starving; but at the same time he expressed a
good deal of anxiety lest some accident might happen to the army in
north carolina during my absence. i explained to him that that army
was snug and comfortable, in good camps, at goldsboro'; that it
would require some days to collect forage and food for another
march; and that general schofield was fully competent to command it
in my absence. having made a good, long, social visit, we took our
leave and returned to general grant's quarters, where mrs. grant
had provided tea. while at the table, mrs. grant inquired if we had
seen mrs. lincoln. "no," said the general, "i did not ask for her;"
and i added that i did not even know that she was on board. mrs.
grant then exclaimed, "well, you are a pretty pair!" and added that
our neglect was unpardonable; when the general said we would call
again the next day, and make amends for the unintended slight.
early the next day, march th, all the principal officers of
the army and navy called to see me, generals meade, ord, ingalls,
etc., and admiral porter. at this time the river queen was at
anchor out in the river, abreast of the wharf, and we again started
to visit mr. and mrs. lincoln. admiral porter accompanied us. we
took a small, tug at the wharf, which conveyed us on board, where
we were again received most courteously by the president, who
conducted us to the after-cabin. after the general compliments,
general grant inquired after mrs. lincoln, when the president went
to her stateroom, returned, and begged us to excuse her, as she was
not well. we then again entered upon a general conversation, during
which general grant explained to the president that at that very
instant of time general sheridan was crossing james river from the
north, by a pontoon-bridge below city point; that he had a large,
well-appointed force of cavalry, with which he proposed to strike
the southside and danville railroads, by which alone general lee,
in richmond, supplied his army; and that, in his judgment, matters
were drawing to a crisis, his only apprehension being that general
lee would not wait long enough. i also explained that my army at
goldsboro' was strong enough to fight lee's army and johnston's
combined, provided that general grant could come up within a day or
so; that if lee would only remain in richmond another fortnight, i
could march up to burkesville, when lee would have to starve inside
of his lines, or come out from his intrenchments and fight us on
equal terms.
both general grant and myself supposed that one or the other of
us would have to fight one more bloody battle, and that it would be
the last. mr. lincoln exclaimed, more than once, that there had
been blood enough shed, and asked us if another battle could not be
avoided. i remember well to have said that we could not control
that event; that this necessarily rested with our enemy; and i
inferred that both jeff. davis and general lee would be forced to
fight one more desperate and bloody battle. i rather supposed it
would fall on me, somewhere near raleigh; and general grant added
that, if lee would only wait a few more days, he would have his
army so disposed that if the enemy should abandon richmond, and
attempt to make junction with general jos. johnston in north
carolina, he (general grant) would be on his heels. mr. lincoln
more than once expressed uneasiness that i was not with my army at
goldsboro', when i again assured him that general schofield was
fully competent to command in my absence; that i was going to start
back that very day, and that admiral porter had kindly provided for
me the steamer bat, which he said was much swifter than my own
vessel, the russia. during this interview i inquired of the
president if he was all ready for the end of the war. what was to
be done with the rebel armies when defeated? and what should be
done with the political leaders, such as jeff. davis, etc.? should
we allow them to escape, etc.? he said he was all ready; all he
wanted of us was to defeat the opposing armies, and to get the men
composing the confederate armies back to their homes, at work on
their farms and in their shops. as to jeff. davis, he was hardly at
liberty to speak his mind fully, but intimated that he ought to
clear out, "escape the country," only it would not do for him to
say so openly. as usual, he illustrated his meaning by a story:
a man once had taken the total-abstinence pledge. when visiting
a friend, he was invited to take a drink, but declined, on the
score of his pledge; when his friend suggested lemonade, which was
accepted. in preparing the lemonade, the friend pointed to the
brandy-bottle, and said the lemonade would be more palatable if he
were to pour in a little brandy; when his guest said, if he could
do so "unbeknown" to him, he would "not object." from which
illustration i inferred that mr. lincoln wanted davis to escape,
"unbeknown" to him.
i made no notes of this conversation at the time, but admiral
porter, who was present, did, and in  he furnished me an
account thereof, which i insert below, but the admiral describes
the first visit, of the th, whereas my memory puts admiral
porter's presence on the following day. still he may be right, and
he may have been with us the day before, as i write this chiefly
from memory. there were two distinct interviews; the first was late
in the afternoon of march th, and the other about noon of the
th, both in the after-cabin of the steamer river queen; on both
occasions mr. lincoln was full and frank in his conversation,
assuring me that in his mind he was all ready for the civil
reorganization of affairs at the south as soon as the war was over;
and he distinctly authorized me to assure governor vance and the
people of north carolina that, as soon as the rebel armies laid
down their arms, and resumed their civil pursuits, they would at
once be guaranteed all their rights as citizens of a common
country; and that to avoid anarchy the state governments then in
existence, with their civil functionaries, would be recognized by
him as the government de facto till congress could provide
others.
i know, when i left him, that i was more than ever impressed by
his kindly nature, his deep and earnest sympathy with the
afflictions of the whole people, resulting from the war, and by the
march of hostile armies through the south; and that his earnest
desire seemed to be to end the war speedily, without more bloodshed
or devastation, and to restore all the men of both sections to
their homes. in the language of his second inaugural address, he
seemed to have "charity for all, malice toward none," and, above
all, an absolute faith in the courage, manliness, and integrity of
the armies in the field. when at rest or listening, his legs and
arms seemed to hang almost lifeless, and his face was care-worn and
haggard; but, the moment he began to talk, his face lightened up,
his tall form, as it were, unfolded, and he was the very
impersonation of good-humor and fellowship. the last words i recall
as addressed to me were that he would feel better when i was back
at goldsboro'. we parted at the gangway of the river queen, about
noon of march th, and i never saw him again. of all the men i
ever met, he seemed to possess more of the elements of greatness,
combined with goodness, than any other.
admiral porter's account of the interview with mr. lincoln.
the day of general sherman's arrival at city point (i think the
th of march, ), i accompanied him and general grant on board
the president's flagship, the queen, where the president received
us in the upper saloon, no one but ourselves being present.
the president was in an exceedingly pleasant mood, and delighted to
meet general sherman, whom he cordially greeted.
it seems that this was the first time he had met sherman, to
remember him, since the beginning of the war, and did not remember
when he had seen him before, until the general reminded him of the
circumstances of their first meeting.
this was rather singular on the part of mr. lincoln, who was, i
think, remarkable for remembering people, having that kingly
quality in an eminent degree. indeed, such was the power of his
memory, that he seemed never to forget the most minute
circumstance.
the conversation soon turned on the events of sherman's campaign
through the south, with every movement of which the president
seemed familiar.
he laughed over some of the stories sherman told of his "bummers,"
and told others in return, which illustrated in a striking manner
the ideas he wanted to convey. for example, he would often express
his wishes by telling an apt story, which was quite a habit with
him, and one that i think he adopted to prevent his committing
himself seriously.
the interview between the two generals and the president lasted
about an hour and a half, and, as it was a remarkable one, i jotted
down what i remembered of the conversation, as i have made a
practice of doing during the rebellion, when any thing interesting
occurred.
i don't regret having done so, as circumstances afterward occurred
(stanton's ill conduct toward sherman) which tended to cast odium
on general sherman for allowing such liberal terms to jos.
johnston.
could the conversation that occurred on board the queen, between
the president and general sherman, have been known, sherman would
not, and could not, have been censored. mr. lincoln, had he lived,
would have acquitted the general of any blame, for he was only
carrying out the president's wishes.
my opinion is, that mr. lincoln came down to city point with the
most liberal views toward the rebels. he felt confident that we
would be successful, and was willing that the enemy should
capitulate on the most favorable terms.
i don't know what the president would have done had he been left to
himself, and had our army been unsuccessful, but he was than
wrought up to a high state of excitement. he wanted peace on almost
any terms, and there is no knowing what proposals he might have
been willing to listen to. his heart was tenderness throughout,
and, as long as the rebels laid down their arms, he did not care
how it was done. i do not know how far he was influenced by general
grant, but i presume, from their long conferences, that they must
have understood each other perfectly, and that the terms given to
lee after his surrender were authorized by mr. lincoln. i know that
the latter was delighted when he heard that they had been given,
and exclaimed, a dozen times, "good!" "all right!" "exactly the
thing!" and other similar expressions. indeed, the president more
than once told me what he supposed the terms would be: if lee and
johnston surrendered, he considered the war ended, and that all the
other rebel forces world lay down their arms at once.
in this he proved to be right. grant and sherman were both of the
same opinion, and so was everyone else who knew anything about the
matter.
what signified the terms to them, so long as we obtained the actual
surrender of people who only wanted a good opportunity to give up
gracefully? the rebels had fought "to the last ditch," and all that
they had left them was the hope of being handed down in history as
having received honorable terms.
after hearing general sherman's account of his own position, and
that of johnston, at that time, the president expressed fears that
the rebel general would escape south again by the railroads, and
that general sherman would have to chase him anew, over the same
ground; but the general pronounced this to be impracticable. he
remarked: "i have him where he cannot move without breaking up his
army, which, once disbanded, can never again be got together; and i
have destroyed the southern railroads, so that they cannot be used
again for a long time." general grant remarked, "what is to prevent
their laying the rails again?" "why," said general sherman, "my
bummers don't do things by halves. every rail, after having been
placed over a hot fire, has been twisted as crooked as a
ram's-horn, and they never can be used again."
this was the only remark made by general grant during the
interview, as he sat smoking a short distance from the president,
intent, no doubt, on his own plans, which were being brought to a
successful termination.
the conversation between the president and general sherman, about
the terms of surrender to be allowed jos. johnston, continued.
sherman energetically insisted that he could command his own terms,
and that johnston would have to yield to his demands; but the
president was very decided about the matter, and insisted that the
surrender of johnston's army most be obtained on any terms.
general grant was evidently of the same way of thinking, for,
although he did not join in the conversation to any extent, yet he
made no objections, and i presume had made up his mind to allow the
best terms himself.
he was also anxious that johnston should not be driven into
richmond, to reenforce the rebels there, who, from behind their
strong intrenchments, would have given us incalculable
trouble.
sherman, as a subordinate officer, yielded his views to those of
the president, and the terms of capitulation between himself and
johnston were exactly in accordance with mr. lincoln's wishes. he
could not have done any thing which would have pleased the
president better.
mr. lincoln did, in fact, arrange the (so considered) liberal terms
offered general jos. johnston, and, whatever may have been general
sherman's private views, i feel sure that he yielded to the wishes
of the president in every respect. it was mr. lincoln's policy that
was carried out, and, had he lived long enough, he would have been
but too glad to have acknowledged it. had mr. lincoln lived,
secretary stanton would have issued no false telegraphic
dispatches, in the hope of killing off another general in the
regular army, one who by his success had placed himself in the way
of his own succession.
the disbanding of jos. johnston's army was so complete, that the
pens and ink used in the discussion of the matter were all
wasted.
it was asserted, by the rabid ones, that general sherman had given
up all that we had been fighting for, had conceded every thing to
jos. johnston, and had, as the boys say, "knocked the fat into the
fire;" but sober reflection soon overruled these harsh expressions,
and, with those who knew general sherman, and appreciated him, he
was still the great soldier, patriot, and gentleman. in future
times this matter will be looked at more calmly and
dispassionately. the bitter animosities that have been engendered
during the rebellion will have died out for want of food on which
to live, and the very course grant, sherman, and others pursued, in
granting liberal terms to the defeated rebels, will be applauded.
the fact is, they met an old beggar in the road, whose crutches had
broken from under him: they let him have only the broken crutches
to get home with!
i sent general sherman back to newbern, north carolina, in the
steamer bat.
while he was absent from his command he was losing no time, for he
was getting his army fully equipped with stores and clothing; and,
when he returned, he had a rested and regenerated army, ready to
swallow up jos. johnston and all his ragamuffins.
johnston was cornered, could not move without leaving every thing
behind him, and could not go to richmond without bringing on a
famine in that destitute city.
i was with mr. lincoln all the time he was at city point, and until
he left for washington. he was more than delighted with the
surrender of lee, and with the terms grant gave the rebel general;
and would have given jos. johnston twice as much, had the latter
asked for it, and could he have been certain that the rebel world
have surrendered without a fight. i again repeat that, had mr.
lincoln lived, he would have shouldered all the
responsibility.
one thing is certain: had jos. johnston escaped and got into
richmond, and caused a larger list of killed and wounded than we
had, general sherman would have been blamed. then why not give him
the full credit of capturing on the best terms the enemy's last
important army and its best general, and putting an end to the
rebellion.
it was a finale worthy of sherman's great march through the swamps
and deserts of the south, a march not excelled by any thing we read
of in modern military history.
d. d. porter, vice-admiral.
(written by the admiral in , at the united states naval academy
at annapolis, md., and mailed to general sherman at st. louis,
mo.)
as soon as possible, i arranged with general grant for certain
changes in the organization of my army; and the general also
undertook to send to north carolina some tug-boat and barges to
carry stores from newbern up as far as kinston, whence they could
be hauled in wagons to our camps, thus relieving our railroads to
that extent. i undertook to be ready to march north by april th,
and then embarked on the steamer bat, captain barnes, for north
carolina. we steamed down james river, and at old point comfort
took on board my brother, senator sherman, and mr. edwin stanton,
son of the secretary of war, and proceeded at once to our
destination. on our way down the river, captain barnes expressed
himself extremely obliged to me for taking his vessel, as it had
relieved him of a most painful dilemma. he explained that he had
been detailed by admiral porter to escort the president's unarmed
boat, the river queen, in which capacity it became his special duty
to look after mrs. lincoln. the day before my arrival at city
point, there had been a grand review of a part of the army of the
james, then commanded by general ord. the president rode out from
city point with general grant on horseback, accompanied by a
numerous staff, including captain barnes and mrs. ord; but mrs.
lincoln and mrs. grant had followed in a carriage.
the cavalcade reached the review-ground some five or six miles
out from city point, found the troops all ready, drawn up in line,
and after the usual presentation of arms, the president and party,
followed by mrs. ord and captain barnes on horseback, rode the
lines, and returned to the reviewing stand, which meantime had been
reached by mrs. lincoln and mrs. grant in their carriage, which had
been delayed by the driver taking a wrong road. mrs. lincoln,
seeing mrs. ord and captain barnes riding with the retinue, and
supposing that mrs. ord had personated her, turned on captain
barnes and gave him a fearful scolding; and even indulged in some
pretty sharp upbraidings to mrs. ord.
this made barne's position very unpleasant, so that he felt much
relieved when he was sent with me to north carolina. the bat was
very fast, and on the morning of the th we were near cape
hatteras; captain barnes, noticing a propeller coming out of
hatteras inlet, made her turn back and pilot us in. we entered
safely, steamed up pamlico sound into neuse river, and the next
morning,--by reason of some derangement of machinery, we anchored
about seven miles below newbern, whence we went up in captain
barnes's barge. as soon as we arrived at newbern, i telegraphed up
to general schofield at goldsboro' the fact of my return, and that
i had arranged with general grant for the changes made necessary in
the reorganization of the army, and for the boats necessary to
carry up the provisions and stores we needed, prior to the renewal
of our march northward.
these changes amounted to constituting the left wing a distinct
army, under the title of "the army of georgia," under command of
general slocum, with his two corps commanded by general jeff. c.
davis and general joseph a. mower; the tenth and twenty-third corps
already constituted another army, "of the ohio," under the command
of major-general schofield, and his two corps were commanded by
generals j. d. cox and a. h. terry. these changes were necessary,
because army commanders only could order courts-martial, grant
discharges, and perform many other matters of discipline and
administration which were indispensable; but my chief purpose was
to prepare the whole army for what seemed among the probabilities
of the time--to fight both lee's and johnston's armies combined, in
case their junction could be formed before general grant could
possibly follow lee to north carolina.
general george h. thomas, who still remained at nashville, was
not pleased with these changes, for the two corps with general
slocum, viz., the fourteenth and twentieth, up to that time, had
remained technically a part of his "army of the cumberland;" but he
was so far away, that i had to act to the best advantage with the
troops and general officers actually present. i had specially asked
for general mower to command the twentieth corps, because i
regarded him as one of the boldest and best fighting generals in
the whole army. his predecessor, general a. s. williams, the senior
division commander present, had commanded the corps well from
atlanta to goldsboro', and it may have seemed unjust to replace him
at that precise moment; but i was resolved to be prepared for a
most desperate and, as then expected, a final battle, should it
fall on me.
i returned to goldsboro' from newbern by rail the evening of
march th, and at once addressed myself to the task of
reorganization and replenishment of stores, so as to be ready to
march by april th, the day agreed on with general grant.
the army was divided into the usual three parts, right and left
wings, and centre. the tabular statements herewith will give the
exact composition of these separate armies, which by the th of
april gave the following effective strength:
infantry
artillery
cavalry
 aggregate
total number of guns
the railroads to our rear had also been repaired, so that stores
were arriving very fast, both from morehead city and wilmington.
the country was so level that a single locomotive could haul
twenty-five and thirty cars to a train, instead of only ten, as was
the case in tennessee and upper georgia.
by the th of april such progress had been made, that i issued
the following special field orders, no. , prescribing the time
and manner of the next march
[special field orders, no. .]
goldsboro', north carolina, april , .
confidential to army commanders, corps commanders, and chiefs of
staff departments:
the next grand objective is to place this army (with its full
equipment) north of roanoke river, facing west, with a base for
supplies at norfolk, and at winton or murfreesboro' on the chowan,
and in full communication with the army of the potomac, about
petersburg; and also to do the enemy as much harm as possible en
route:
. to accomplish this result the following general plan will be
followed, or modified only by written orders from these
headquarters, should events require a change:
(.) on monday, the th of april, all preparations are presumed to
be complete, and the outlying detachments will be called in, or
given directions to meet on the next march. all preparations will
also be complete to place the railroad-stock back of kinston on the
one road, and below the northeast branch on the other.
(.) on tuesday, the th, the columns will draw out on their lines
of march, say, about seven miles, and close up.
(.) on wednesday the march will begin in earnest, and will be kept
up at the rate, say, of about twelve miles a day, or according to
the amount of resistance. all the columns will dress to the left
(which is the exposed flank), and commanders will study always to
find roads by which they can, if necessary, perform a general left
wheel, the wagons to be escorted to some place of security on the
direct route of march. foraging and other details may continue as
heretofore, only more caution and prudence should be observed; and
foragers should not go in advance of the advance-guard, but look
more to our right rear for corn, bacon, and meal.
. the left wing (major-general slocum commanding) will aim
straight for the railroad-bridge near smithfield; thence along up
the neuse river to the railroad-bridge over neuse river, northeast
of raleigh (powell's); thence to warrenton, the general point of
concentration.
the centre (major-general schofield commanding) will move to
whitley's mill, ready to support the left until it is past
smithfield, when it will follow up (substantially) little river to
about rolesville, ready at all times to move to the support of the
left; after passing tar river, to move to warrenton.
the right wing (major-general howard commanding), preceded by the
cavalry, will move rapidly on pikeville and nahunta, then swing
across to bulah to folk's bridge, ready to make junction with the
other armies in case the enemy offers battle this side of neuse
river, about smithfield; thence, in case of no serious opposition
on the left, will work up toward earpsboro', andrews, b--—,
and warrenton.
the cavalry (general kilpatrick commanding), leaving its
encumbrances with the right wing, will push as though straight for
weldon, until the enemy is across tar river, and that bridge
burned; then it will deflect toward nashville and warrenton,
keeping up communication with general headquarters.
. as soon as the army starts, the chief-quartermaster and
commissary will prepare a resupply of stores at some point on
pamlico or albemarle sounds, ready to be conveyed to kinston or
winton and murfreesboro', according to developments. as soon as
they have satisfactory information that the army is north of the
roanoke, they will forthwith establish a depot at winton, with a
sub-depot at murfreesboro'. major-general schofield will hold, as
heretofore, wilmington (with the bridge across northern branch as
an outpost), newborn (and kinston as its outpost), and will be
prepared to hold winton and murfreesboro' as soon as the time
arrives for that move. the navy has instructions from admiral
porter to cooperate, and any commanding officer is authorized to
call on the navy for assistance and cooperation, always in writing,
setting forth the reasons, of which necessarily the naval commander
must be the judge.
. the general-in-chief will be with the centre habitually, but may
in person shift to either flank where his presence may be needed,
leaving a staff-officer to receive reports. he requires,
absolutely, a report of each army or grand detachment each night,
whether any thing material has occurred or not, for often the
absence of an enemy is a very important fact in military
prognostication.
by order of major-general w. t. sherman,
l. m. dayton, assistant adjutant-general.
but the whole problem became suddenly changed by the news of the
fall of richmond and petersburg, which reached as at goldsboro', on
the th of april. the confederate government, with lee's army, had
hastily abandoned richmond, fled in great disorder toward danville,
and general grant's whole army was in close pursuit. of course, i
inferred that general lee would succeed in making junction with
general johnston, with at least a fraction of his army, somewhere
to my front. i at once altered the foregoing orders, and prepared
on the day appointed, viz., april th, to move straight on
raleigh, against the army of general johnston, known to be at
smithfield, and supposed to have about thirty-five thousand men.
wade hampton's cavalry was on his left front and wheeler's on his
right front, simply watching us and awaiting our initiative.
meantime the details of the great victories in virginia came thick
and fast, and on the th i received from general grant this
communication, in the form of a cipher-dispatch:
wilson's station, april , 
major-general sherman, goldsboro', north carolina:
all indications now are that lee will attempt to reach danville
with the remnant of his force. sheridan, who was up with him last
night, reports all that is left with him--horse, foot, and
dragoons--at twenty thousand, much demoralized. we hope to reduce
this number one-half. i will push on to burkesville, and, if a
stand is made at danville, will, in a very few days, go there. if
you can possibly do so, push on from where you are, and let us see
if we cannot finish the job with lee's and johnston's armies.
whether it will be better for you to strike for greensboro' or
nearer to danville, you will be better able to judge when you
receive this. rebel armies now are the only strategic points to
strike at.
u. s. grant, lieutenant-general.
i answered immediately that we would move on the th, prepared
to follow johnston wherever he might go. promptly on monday
morning, april th, the army moved straight on smithfield; the
right wing making a circuit by the right, and the left wing,
supported by the centre, moving on the two direct roads toward
raleigh, distant fifty miles. general terry's and general
kilpatrick's troops moved from their positions on the south or west
bank of the neuse river in the same general direction, by cox's
bridge. on the th we reached smithfield, and found it abandoned
by johnston's army, which had retreated hastily on raleigh, burning
the bridges. to restore these consumed the remainder of the day,
and during that night i received a message from general grant, at
appomattox, that general lee had surrendered to him his whole army,
which i at once announced to the troops in orders:
[special field orders, no. ]
in the field, smithfield, north carolina, april , .
the general commanding announces to the army that he has official
notice from general grant that general lee surrendered to him his
entire army, on the th inst., at appomattox court-house,
virginia.
glory to god and our country, and all honor to our comrades in
arms, toward whom we are marching!
a little more labor, a little more toil on our part, the great race
is won, and our government stands regenerated, after four long
years of war.
w. t. sherman, major-general commanding.
of course, this created a perfect furore, of rejoicing, and we
all regarded the war as over, for i knew well that general johnston
had no army with which to oppose mine. so that the only questions
that remained were, would he surrender at raleigh? or would he
allow his army to disperse into guerrilla bands, to "die in the
last ditch," and entail on his country an indefinite and prolonged
military occupation, and of consequent desolation? i knew well that
johnston's army could not be caught; the country was too open; and,
without wagons, the men could escape us, disperse, and assemble
again at some place agreed on, and thus the war might be prolonged
indefinitely.
i then remembered mr. lincoln's repeated expression that he
wanted the rebel soldiers not only defeated, but "back at their
homes, engaged in their civil pursuits." on the evening of the th
i was with the head of slocum's column, at gulley's, and general
kilpatrick's cavalry was still ahead, fighting wade hampton's
rear-guard, with orders to push it through raleigh, while i would
give a more southerly course to the infantry columns, so as, if
possible, to prevent a retreat southward. on the th, early, i
entered raleigh, and ordered the several heads of column toward
ashville in the direction of salisbury or charlotte. before
reaching raleigh, a locomotive came down the road to meet me,
passing through both wade hampton's and kilpatrick's cavalry,
bringing four gentlemen, with a letter from governor vance to me,
asking protection for the citizens of raleigh. these gentlemen
were, of course, dreadfully excited at the dangers through which
they had passed. among them were ex-senator graham, mr. swain,
president of chapel hill university, and a surgeon warren, of the
confederate army. they had come with a flag of truce, to which they
were not entitled; still, in the interest of peace, i respected it,
and permitted them to return to raleigh with their locomotive, to
assure the governor and the people that the war was substantially
over, and that i wanted the civil authorities to remain in the
execution of their office till the pleasure of the president could
be ascertained. on reaching raleigh i found these same gentlemen,
with messrs. badger, bragg, holden, and others, but governor vance
had fled, and could not be prevailed on to return, because he
feared an arrest and imprisonment. from the raleigh newspapers of
the th i learned that general stoneman, with his division of
cavalry, had come across the mountains from east tennessee, had
destroyed the railroad at salisbury, and was then supposed to be
approaching greensboro'. i also learned that general wilson's
cavalry corps was "smashing things" down about selma and
montgomery, alabama, and was pushing for columbus and macon,
georgia; and i also had reason to expect that general sheridan
would come down from appomattox to join us at raleigh with his
superb cavalry corps. i needed more cavalry to check johnston's
retreat, so that i could come up to him with my infantry, and
therefore had good reason to delay. i ordered the railroad to be
finished up to raleigh, so that i could operate from it as a base,
and then made:
[special field orders, no. ]
raleigh, north carolina, april , .
the next movement will be on ashboro', to turn the position of the
enemy at the "company's shops" in rear of haw river bridge, and at
greensboro', and to cut off his only available line of retreat by
salisbury and charlotte:
. general kilpatrick will keep up a show of pursuit in the
direction of hillsboro' and graham, but be ready to cross haw river
on general howard's bridge, near pittsboro', and thence will
operate toward greensboro', on the right front of the right
wing.
. the right wing, major-general howard commanding, will move out
on the chapel hill road, and send a light division up in the
direction of chapel hill university to act in connection with the
cavalry; but the main columns and trains will move via hackney's
cross-roads, and trader's hill, pittsboro', st. lawrence, etc., to
be followed by the cavalry and light division, as soon as the
bridge is laid over haw river.
. the centre, major-general schofield commanding, will move via
holly springs, new hill, haywood, and moffitt's mills.
. the left wing, major-general slocum commanding, will move
rapidly by the aven's ferry road, carthage, caledonia, and cox's
mills.
. all the troops will draw well out on the roads designated during
today and to-morrow, and on the following day will move with all
possible rapidity for ashboro'. no further destruction of
railroads, mills, cotton, and produce, will be made without the
specific orders of an army commander, and the inhabitants will be
dealt with kindly, looking to an early reconciliation. the troops
will be permitted, however, to gather forage and provisions as
heretofore; only more care should be taken not to strip the poorer
classes too closely.
by order of general w. t. sherman,
l. m. dayton, assistant adjutant-general.
thus matters stood, when on the morning of the th general
kilpatrick reported from durham's station, twenty-six miles up the
railroad toward hillsboro', that a flag of truce had come in from
the enemy with a package from general johnston addressed to me.
taking it for granted that this was preliminary to a surrender, i
ordered the message to be sent me at raleigh, and on the th
received from general johnston a letter dated april , , in
these words:
the results of the recent campaign in virginia have changed the
relative military condition of the belligerents. i am, therefore,
induced to address you in this form the inquiry whether, to stop
the further effusion of blood and devastation of property, you are
willing to make a temporary suspension of active operations, and to
communicate to lieutenant-general grant, commanding the armies of
the united states, the request that he will take like action in
regard to other armies, the object being to permit the civil
authorities to enter into the needful arrangements to terminate the
existing war.
to which i replied as follows:
in the field, raleigh, north carolina, april , .
general j. e. johnston, commanding confederate army.
general: i have this moment received your communication of this
date. i am fully empowered to arrange with you any terms for the
suspension of farther hostilities between the armies commanded by
you and those commanded by myself, and will be willing to confer
with you to that end. i will limit the advance of my main column,
to-morrow, to morrisville, and the cavalry to the university, and
expect that you will also maintain the present position of your
forces until each has notice of a failure to agree.
that a basis of action may be had, i undertake to abide by the same
terms and conditions as were made by generals grant and lee at
appomattox court-house, on the th instant, relative to our two
armies; and, furthermore, to obtain from general grant an order to
suspend the movements of any troops from the direction of virginia.
general stoneman is under my command, and my order will suspend any
devastation or destruction contemplated by him. i will add that i
really desire to save the people of north carolina the damage they
would sustain by the march of this army through the central or
western parts of the state.
i am, with respect, your obedient servant,
w. t. sherman, major-general.
i sent my aide-de-camp, colonel mccoy, up to durham's station
with this letter, with instructions to receive the answer, to
telegraph its contents back to me at raleigh, and to arrange for an
interview. on the th i received a reply from general johnston,
agreeing to meet me the next day at a point midway between our
advance at durham and his rear at hillsboro'. i ordered a car and
locomotive to be prepared to convey me up to durham's at eight
o'clock of the morning of april th. just as we were entering the
car, the telegraph-operator, whose office was up-stairs in the
depot-building, ran down to me and said that he was at that instant
of time receiving a most important dispatch in cipher from morehead
city, which i ought to see. i held the train for nearly half an
hour, when he returned with the message translated and written out.
it was from mr. stanton, announcing the assassination of mr.
lincoln, the attempt on the life of mr. seward and son, and a
suspicion that a like fate was designed for general grant and all
the principal officers of the government. dreading the effect of
such a message at that critical instant of time, i asked the
operator if any one besides himself had seen it; he answered no! i
then bade him not to reveal the contents by word or look till i
came back, which i proposed to do the same afternoon. the train
then started, and, as we passed morris's station, general logan,
commanding the fifteenth corps, came into my car, and i told him i
wanted to see him on my return, as i had something very important
to communicate. he knew i was going to meet general johnston, and
volunteered to say that he hoped i would succeed in obtaining his
surrender, as the whole army dreaded the long march to charlotte
(one hundred and seventy-five miles), already begun, but which had
been interrupted by the receipt of general johnston's letter of the
th. we reached durham's, twenty-six miles, about  a.m., where
general kilpatrick had a squadron of cavalry drawn up to receive
me. we passed into the house in which he had his headquarters, and
soon after mounted some led horses, which he had prepared for
myself and staff. general kilpatrick sent a man ahead with a white
flag, followed by a small platoon, behind which we rode, and were
followed by the rest of the escort. we rode up the hillsboro' road
for about five miles, when our flag bearer discovered another
coming to meet him: they met, and word was passed back to us that
general johnston was near at hand, when we rode forward and met
general johnston on horseback, riding side by side with general
wade hampton. we shook hands, and introduced our respective
attendants. i asked if there was a place convenient where we could
be private, and general johnston said he had passed a small
farmhouse a short distance back, when we rode back to it together
side by side, our staff-officers and escorts following. we had
never met before, though we had been in the regular army together
for thirteen years; but it so happened that we had never before
come together. he was some twelve or more years my senior; but we
knew enough of each other to be well acquainted at once. we soon
reached the house of a mr. bennett, dismounted, and left our horses
with orderlies in the road. our officers, on foot, passed into the
yard, and general johnston and i entered the small frame-house. we
asked the farmer if we could have the use of his house for a few
minutes, and he and his wife withdrew into a smaller log-house,
which stood close by.
as soon as we were alone together i showed him the dispatch
announcing mr. lincoln's assassination, and watched him closely.
the perspiration came out in large drops on his forehead, and he
did not attempt to conceal his distress. he denounced the act as a
disgrace to the age, and hoped i did not charge it to the
confederate government. i told him i could not believe that he or
general lee, or the officers of the confederate army, could
possibly be privy to acts of assassination; but i would not say as
much for jeff. davis, george sanders, and men of that stripe. we
talked about the effect of this act on the country at large and on
the armies, and he realized that it made my situation extremely
delicate. i explained to him that i had not yet revealed the news
to my own personal staff or to the army, and that i dreaded the
effect when made known in raleigh. mr. lincoln was peculiarly
endeared to the soldiers, and i feared that some foolish woman or
man in raleigh might say something or do something that would
madden our men, and that a fate worse than that of columbia would
befall the place.
i then told johnston that he must be convinced that he could not
oppose my army, and that, since lee had surrendered, he could do
the same with honor and propriety. he plainly and repeatedly
admitted this, and added that any further fighting would be
"murder;" but he thought that, instead of surrendering piecemeal,
we might arrange terms that would embrace all the confederate
armies. i asked him if he could control other armies than his own;
he said, not then, but intimated that he could procure authority
from mr. davis. i then told him that i had recently had an
interview with general grant and president lincoln, and that i was
possessed of their views; that with them and the people north there
seemed to be no vindictive feeling against the confederate armies,
but there was against davis and his political adherents; and that
the terms that general grant had given to general lee's army were
certainly most generous and liberal. all this he admitted, but
always recurred to the idea of a universal surrender, embracing his
own army, that of dick taylor in louisiana and texas, and of maury,
forrest, and others, in alabama and georgia. general johnston's
account of our interview in his "narrative" (page , et seq.) is
quite accurate and correct, only i do not recall his naming the
capitulation of loeben, to which he refers. our conversation was
very general and extremely cordial, satisfying me that it could
have but one result, and that which we all desired, viz., to end
the war as quickly as possible; and, being anxious to return to
raleigh before the news of mr. lincoln's assassination could be
divulged, on general johnston's saying that he thought that, during
the night, he could procure authority to act in the name of all the
confederate armies in existence we agreed to meet again the next
day at noon at the same place, and parted, he for hillsboro' and i
for raleigh.
we rode back to durham's station in the order we had come, and
then i showed the dispatch announcing mr. lincoln's death. i
cautioned the officers to watch the soldiers closely, to prevent
any violent retaliation by them, leaving that to the government at
washington; and on our way back to raleigh in the cars i showed the
same dispatch to general logan and to several of the officers of
the fifteenth corps that were posted at morrisville and jones's
station, all of whom were deeply impressed by it; but all gave
their opinion that this sad news should not change our general
course of action.
as soon as i reached raleigh i published the following orders to
the army, announcing the assassination of the president, and i
doubt if, in the whole land, there were more sincere mourners over
his sad fate than were then in and about raleigh. i watched the
effect closely, and was gratified that there was no single act of
retaliation; though i saw and felt that one single word by me would
have laid the city in ashes, and turned its whole population
houseless upon the country, if not worse:
[special field orders, no. .]
raleigh, north carolina, april , .
the general commanding announces, with pain and sorrow, that on the
evening of the th instant, at the theatre in washington city, his
excellency the president of the united states, mr. lincoln, was
assassinated by one who uttered the state motto of virginia. at the
same time, the secretary of state, mr. seward, while suffering from
a broken arm, was also stabbed by another murderer in his own
house, but still survives, and his son was wounded, supposed
fatally. it is believed, by persons capable of judging, that other
high officers were designed to share the same fate. thus it seems
that our enemy, despairing of meeting us in open, manly warfare,
begins to resort to the assassin's tools.
your general does not wish you to infer that this is universal, for
he knows that the great mass of the confederate army world scorn to
sanction each acts, but he believes it the legitimate consequence
of rebellion against rightful authority.
we have met every phase which this war has assumed, and must now be
prepared for it in its last and worst shape, that of assassins and
guerrillas; but woe onto the people who seek to expend their wild
passions in such a manner, for there is but one dread result!
by order of major-general w. t. sherman,
l. m. dayton, assistant adjutant-general.
during the evening of the th and morning of the th i saw
nearly all the general officers of the army (schofield, slocum,
howard, logan, blair), and we talked over the matter of the
conference at bennett's house of the day before, and, without
exception, all advised me to agree to some terms, for they all
dreaded the long and harassing march in pursuit of a dissolving and
fleeing army--a march that might carry us back again over the
thousand miles that we had just accomplished. we all knew that if
we could bring johnston's army to bay, we could destroy it in an
hour, but that was simply impossible in the country in which we
found ourselves. we discussed all the probabilities, among which
was, whether, if johnston made a point of it, i should assent to
the escape from the country of jeff. davis and his fugitive
cabinet; and some one of my general officers, either logan or
blair, insisted that, if asked for, we should even provide a vessel
to carry them to nassau from charleston.
the next morning i again started in the cars to durham's
station, accompanied by most of my personal staff, and by generals
blair, barry, howard, etc., and, reaching general kilpatrick's
headquarters at durham's, we again mounted, and rode, with the same
escort of the day, before, to bennett's house, reaching there
punctually at noon. general johnston had not yet arrived, but a
courier shortly came, and reported him as on the way. it must have
been nearly  p.m. when he arrived, as before, with general wade
hampton. he had halted his escort out of sight, and we again
entered bennett's house, and i closed the door. general johnston
then assured me that he had authority over all the confederate
armies, so that they would obey his orders to surrender on the same
terms with his own, but he argued that, to obtain so cheaply this
desirable result, i ought to give his men and officers some
assurance of their political rights after their surrender. i
explained to him that mr. lincoln's proclamation of amnesty, of
december , , still in force; enabled every confederate soldier
and officer, below the rank of colonel, to obtain an absolute
pardon, by simply laying down his arms, and taking the common oath
of allegiance, and that general grant, in accepting the surrender
of general lee's army, had extended the same principle to all the
officers, general lee included; such a pardon, i understood, would
restore to them all their rights of citizenship. but he insisted
that the officers and men of the confederate army were
unnecessarily alarmed about this matter, as a sort of bugbear. he
then said that mr. breckenridge was near at hand, and he thought
that it would be well for him to be present. i objected, on the
score that he was then in davis's cabinet, and our negotiations
should be confined strictly to belligerents. he then said
breckenridge was a major-general in the confederate army, and might
sink his character of secretary of war. i consented, and he sent
one of his staff-officers back, who soon returned with
breckenridge, and he entered the room. general johnston and i then
again went over the whole ground, and breckenridge confirmed what
he had said as to the uneasiness of the southern officers and
soldiers about their political rights in case of surrender. while
we were in consultation, a messenger came with a parcel of papers,
which general johnston said were from mr. reagan,
postmaster-general. he and breckenridge looked over them, and,
after some side conversation, he handed one of the papers to me. it
was in reagan's handwriting, and began with a long preamble and
terms, so general and verbose, that i said they were inadmissible.
then recalling the conversation of mr. lincoln, at city point, i
sat down at the table, and wrote off the terms, which i thought
concisely expressed his views and wishes, and explained that i was
willing to submit these terms to the new president, mr. johnson,
provided that both armies should remain in statu quo until the
truce therein declared should expire. i had full faith that general
johnston would religiously respect the truce, which he did; and
that i would be the gainer, for in the few days it would take to
send the papers to washington, and receive an answer, i could
finish the railroad up to raleigh, and be the better prepared for a
long chase.
neither mr. breckenridge nor general johnston wrote one word of
that paper. i wrote it myself, and announced it as the best i could
do, and they readily assented.
while copies of this paper were being made for signature, the
officers of our staffs commingled in the yard at bennett's house,
and were all presented to generals johnston and breckenridge. all
without exception were rejoiced that the war was over, and that in
a very few days we could turn our faces toward home. i remember
telling breckenridge that he had better get away, as the feeling of
our people was utterly hostile to the political element of the
south, and to him especially, because he was the vice-president of
the united states, who had as such announced mr. lincoln, of
illinois, duly and properly elected the president of the united
states, and yet that he had afterward openly rebelled and taken up
arms against the government. he answered me that he surely would
give us no more trouble, and intimated that he would speedily leave
the country forever. i may have also advised him that mr. davis too
should get abroad as soon as possible.
the papers were duly signed; we parted about dark, and my party
returned to raleigh. early the next morning, april th, i
dispatched by telegraph to morehead city to prepare a fleet-steamer
to carry a messenger to washington, and sent major henry hitchcock
down by rail, bearing the following letters, and agreement with
general johnston, with instructions to be very careful to let
nothing escape him to the greedy newspaper correspondents, but to
submit his papers to general halleck, general grant, or the
secretary of war, and to bring me back with all expedition their
orders and instructions.
on their face they recited that i had no authority to make final
terms involving civil or political questions, but that i submitted
them to the proper quarter in washington for their action; and the
letters fully explained that the military situation was such that
the delay was an advantage to us. i cared little whether they were
approved, modified, or disapproved in toto; only i wanted
instructions. many of my general officers, among whom, i am almost
positive, were generals logan and blair, urged me to accept the
"terms," without reference at all to washington, but i preferred
the latter course:
raleigh, north carolina, april , .
general h. w. halleck, chief of staff, washington, d. c.
general: i received your dispatch describing the man clark,
detailed to assassinate me. he had better be in a hurry, or he will
be too late.
the news of mr. lincoln's death produced a most intense effect on
our troops. at first i feared it would lead to excesses; but now it
has softened down, and can easily be guided. none evinced more
feeling than general johnston, who admitted that the act was
calculated to stain his cause with a dark hue; and he contended
that the loss was most serious to the south, who had begun to
realize that mr. lincoln was the best friend they had.
i cannot believe that even mr. davis was privy to the diabolical
plot, but think it the emanation of a set of young men of the
south, who are very devils. i want to throw upon the south the care
of this class of men, who will soon be as obnoxious to their
industrial classes as to us.
had i pushed johnston's army to an extremity, it would have
dispersed, and done infinite mischief. johnston informed me that
general stoneman had been at salisbury, and was now at statesville.
i have sent him orders to come to me.
general johnston also informed me that general wilson was at
columbia, georgia, and he wanted me to arrest his progress. i leave
that to you.
indeed, if the president sanctions my agreement with johnston, our
interest is to cease all destruction.
please give all orders necessary according to the views the
executive may take, and influence him, if possible, not to vary the
terms at all, for i have considered every thing, and believe that,
the confederate armies once dispersed, we can adjust all else
fairly and well. i am, yours, etc.,
w. t. sherman, major-general commanding.
in the field, raleigh, north carolina, april , .
lieutenant-general u. s. grant, or major-general halleck,
washington, d. c.
general: i inclose herewith a copy of an agreement made this day
between general joseph e. johnston and myself, which, if approved
by the president of the united states, will produce peace from the
potomac to the rio grande. mr. breckenridge was present at our
conference, in the capacity of major-general, and satisfied me of
the ability of general johnston to carry out to their full extent
the terms of this agreement; and if you will get the president to
simply indorse the copy, and commission me to carry out the terms,
i will follow them to the conclusion.
you will observe that it is an absolute submission of the enemy to
the lawful authority of the united states, and disperses his armies
absolutely; and the point to which i attach most importance is,
that the dispersion and disbandment of these armies is done in such
a manner as to prevent their breaking up into guerrilla bands. on
the other hand, we can retain just as much of an army as we please.
i agreed to the mode and manner of the surrender of arms set forth,
as it gives the states the means of repressing guerrillas, which we
could not expect them to do if we stripped them of all arms.
both generals johnston and breckenridge admitted that slavery was
dead, and i could not insist on embracing it in such a paper,
because it can be made with the states in detail. i know that all
the men of substance south sincerely want peace, and i do not
believe they will resort to war again during this century. i have
no doubt that they will in the future be perfectly subordinate to
the laws of the united states. the moment my action in this matter
is approved, i can spare five corps, and will ask for orders to
leave general schofield here with the tenth corps, and to march
myself with the fourteenth, fifteenth, seventeenth, twentieth, and
twenty-third corps via burkesville and gordonsville to frederick or
hagerstown, maryland, there to be paid and mustered out.
the question of finance is now the chief one, and every soldier and
officer not needed should be got home at work. i would like to be
able to begin the march north by may st.
i urge, on the part of the president, speedy action, as it is
important to get the confederate armies to their homes as well as
our own.
i am, with great respect, your obedient servant,
w. t. sherman, major-general commanding.
memorandum, or basis of agreement, made this th day of april, a.
d. , near durham's station, in the state of north carolina, by
and between general joseph e. johnston, commanding the confederate
army, and major-general william t. sherman, commanding the army of
the united states in north carolina, both present:
. the contending armies now in the field to maintain the statu quo
until notice is given by the commanding general of any one to its
opponent, and reasonable time--say, forty-eight
hours--allowed.
. the confederate armies now in existence to be disbanded and
conducted to their several state capitals, there to deposit their
arms and public property in the state arsenal; and each officer and
man to execute and file an agreement to cease from acts of war, and
to abide the action of the state and federal authority. the number
of arms and munitions of war to be reported to the chief of
ordnance at washington city, subject to the future action of the
congress of the united states, and, in the mean time, to be needed
solely to maintain peace and order within the borders of the states
respectively.
. the recognition, by the executive of the united states, of the
several state governments, on their officers and legislatures
taking the oaths prescribed by the constitution of the united
states, and, where conflicting state governments have resulted from
the war, the legitimacy of all shall be submitted to the supreme
court of the united states.
. the reestablishment of all the federal courts in the several
states, with powers as defined by the constitution of the united
states and of the states respectively.
. the people and inhabitants of all the states to be guaranteed,
so far as the executive can, their political rights and franchises,
as well as their rights of person sad property, as defined by the
constitution of the united states and of the states
respectively.
. the executive authority of the government of the united states
not to disturb any of the people by reason of the late war, so long
as they live in peace and quiet, abstain from acts of armed
hostility, and obey the laws in existence at the place of their
residence.
. in general terms--the war to cease; a general amnesty, so far as
the executive of the united states can command, on condition of the
disbandment of the confederate armies, the distribution of the
arms, and the resumption of peaceful pursuits by the officers and
men hitherto composing said armies.
not being fully empowered by our respective principals to fulfill
these terms, we individually and officially pledge ourselves to
promptly obtain the necessary authority, and to carry out the above
programme.
w. t. sherman, major-general, commanding army of the united states
in north carolina.
j. e. johnston, general,
commanding confederate states army in north carolina.
major hitchcock got off on the morning of the th, and i
reckoned that it would take him four or five days to go to
washington and back. during that time the repairs on all the
railroads and telegraph-lines were pushed with energy, and we also
got possession of the railroad and telegraph from raleigh to
weldon, in the direction of norfolk. meantime the troops remained
statu quo, our cavalry occupying durham's station and chapel hill.
general slocum's head of column was at aven's ferry on cape fear
river, and general howard's was strung along the railroad toward
hillsboro'; the rest of the army was in and about raleigh.
on the th i reviewed the tenth corps, and was much pleased at
the appearance of general paines's division of black troops, the
first i had ever seen as a part of an organized army; and on the
st i reviewed the twenty-third corps, which had been with me to
atlanta, but had returned to nashville had formed an essential part
of the army which fought at franklin, and with which general thomas
had defeated general hood in tennessee. it had then been
transferred rapidly by rail to baltimore and washington by general
grant's orders, and thence by sea to north carolina. nothing of
interest happened at raleigh till the evening of april d, when
major hitchcock reported by telegraph his return to morehead city,
and that he would come up by rail during the night. he arrived at 
a.m., april th, accompanied by general grant and one or two
officers of his staff, who had not telegraphed the fact of their
being on the train, for prudential reasons. of course, i was both
surprised and pleased to see the general, soon learned that my
terms with johnston had been disapproved, was instructed by him to
give the forty-eight hours' notice required by the terms of the
truce, and afterward to proceed to attack or follow him. i
immediately telegraphed to general kilpatrick, at durham's, to have
a mounted courier ready to carry the following message, then on its
way up by rail, to the rebel lines:
raleigh, north carolina, april ,   a.m.
general johnston, commanding confederate army, greensboro':
you will take notice that the truce or suspension of hostilities
agreed to between us will cease in forty-eight hours after this is
received at your lines, under the first of the articles of
agreement.
w. t. sherman, major-general.
at the same time i wrote another short note to general johnston,
of the same date:
i have replies from washington to my communications of april th.
i am instructed to limit my operations to your immediate command,
and not to attempt civil negotiations. i therefore demand the
surrender of your army on the same terms as were given to general
lee at appomattox, april th instant, purely and
simply.
of course, both these papers were shown to general grant at the
time, before they were sent, and he approved of them.
at the same time orders were sent to all parts of the army to be
ready to resume the pursuit of the enemy on the expiration of the
forty-eight hours' truce, and messages were sent to general
gillmore (at hilton head) to the same effect, with instructions to
get a similar message through to general wilson, at macon, by some
means.
general grant had brought with him, from washington, written
answers from the secretary of war, and of himself, to my
communications of the th, which i still possess, and here give
the originals. they embrace the copy of a dispatch made by mr.
stanton to general grant, when he was pressing lee at appomattox,
which dispatch, if sent me at the same time (as should have been
done), would have saved a world of trouble. i did not understand
that general grant had come down to supersede me in command, nor
did he intimate it, nor did i receive these communications as a
serious reproof, but promptly acted on them, as is already shown;
and in this connection i give my answer made to general grant, at
raleigh, before i had received any answer from general johnston to
the demand for the surrender of his own army, as well as my answer
to mr. stanton's letter, of the same date, both written on the
supposition that i might have to start suddenly in pursuit of
johnston, and have no other chance to explain.
war department, washington city, april , .
lieutenant-general grant.
general: the memorandum or basis agreed upon between general
sherman and general johnston having been submitted to the
president, they are disapproved. you will give notice of the
disapproval to general sherman, and direct him to resume
hostilities at the earliest moment.
the instructions given to you by the late president, abraham
lincoln, on the d of march, by my telegraph of that date,
addressed to you, express substantially the views of president
andrew johnson, and will be observed by general sherman. a copy is
herewith appended.
the president desires that you proceed immediately to the
headquarters of major-general sherman, and direct operations
against the enemy.
yours truly,
edwin m. stanton, secretary of war.
the following telegram was received  p.m., city point, march ,
 (from washington,  m., march , )
lieutenant-general grant:
the president directs me to say to you that he wishes you to have
no conference with general lee, unless it be for the capitulation
of lee's army or on solely minor and purely military matters.
he instructs me to say that you are not to decide, discuss, or
confer upon any political question; such questions the president
holds in his own hands, and will submit them to no military
conferences or conventions.
meantime you are to press to the utmost your military
advantages.
edwin m. stanton, secretary of war.
washington, d.c. april , .
major-general w. t. sherman, commanding military division of the
mississippi.
general: the basis of agreement entered into between yourself and
general j. e. johnston, for the disbandment of the southern army,
and the extension of the authority of the general government over
all the territory belonging to it, sent for the approval of the
president, is received.
i read it carefully myself before submitting it to the president
and secretary of war, and felt satisfied that it could not possibly
be approved. my reason for these views i will give you at another
time, in a more extended letter.
your agreement touches upon questions of such vital importance
that, as soon as read, i addressed a note to the secretary of war,
notifying him of their receipt, and the importance of immediate
action by the president; and suggested, in view of their
importance, that the entire cabinet be called together, that all
might give an expression of their opinions upon the matter. the
result was a disapproval by the president of the basis laid down; a
disapproval of the negotiations altogether except for the surrender
of the army commanded by general johnston, and directions to me to
notify you of this decision. i cannot do no better than by sending
you the inclosed copy of a dispatch (penned by the late president,
though signed by the secretary of war) in answer to me, on sending
a letter received from general lee, proposing to meet me for the
purpose of submitting the question of peace to a convention of
officers.
please notify general johnston, immediately on receipt of this, of
the termination of the truce, and resume hostilities against his
army at the earliest moment you can, acting in good faith.
very respectfully your obedient servant,
u. s. grant, lieutenant-general.
in the field, raleigh, north carolina, april , .
lieutenant-general u. s. grant, present.
general: i had the honor to receive your letter of april st, with
inclosures, yesterday, and was well pleased that you came along, as
you must have observed that i held the military control so as to
adapt it to any phase the case might assume.
it is but just i should record the fact that i made my terms with
general johnston under the influence of the liberal terms you
extended to the army of general lee at appomattox court-house on
the th, and the seeming policy of our government, as evinced by
the call of the virginia legislature and governor back to richmond,
under yours and president lincoln's very eyes.
it now appears this last act was done without any consultation with
you or any knowledge of mr. lincoln, but rather in opposition to a
previous policy well considered.
i have not the least desire to interfere in the civil policy of our
government, but would shun it as something not to my liking; but
occasions do arise when a prompt seizure of results is forced on
military commanders not in immediate communication with the proper
authority. it is probable that the terms signed by general johnston
and myself were not clear enough on the point, well understood
between us, that our negotiations did not apply to any parties
outside the officers and men of the confederate armies, which could
easily have been remedied.
no surrender of any army not actually at the mercy of an antagonist
was ever made without "terms," and these always define the military
status of the surrendered. thus you stipulated that the officers
and men of lee's army should not be molested at their homes so long
as they obeyed the laws at the place of their residence.
i do not wish to discuss these points involved in our recognition
of the state governments in actual existence, but will merely state
my conclusions, to await the solution of the future.
such action on our part in no manner recognizes for a moment the
so-called confederate government, or makes us liable for its debts
or acts.
the laws and acts done by the several states during the period of
rebellion are void, because done without the oath prescribed by our
constitution of the united states, which is a "condition
precedent."
we have a right to, use any sort of machinery to produce military
results; and it is the commonest thing for military commanders to
use the civil governments in actual existence as a means to an end.
i do believe we could and can use the present state governments
lawfully, constitutionally, and as the very best possible means to
produce the object desired, viz., entire and complete submission to
the lawful authority of the united states.
as to punishment for past crimes, that is for the judiciary, and
can in no manner of way be disturbed by our acts; and, so far as i
can, i will use my influence that rebels shall suffer all the
personal punishment prescribed by law, as also the civil
liabilities arising from their past acts.
what we now want is the new form of law by which common men may
regain the positions of industry, so long disturbed by the
war.
i now apprehend that the rebel armies will disperse; and, instead
of dealing with six or seven states, we will have to deal with
numberless bands of desperadoes, headed by such men as mosby,
forrest, red jackson, and others, who know not and care not for
danger and its consequences.
i am, with great respect, your obedient servant,
w. t. sherman, major-general commanding.
in the field, raleigh, north carolina, april , .
hon. e. m. stanton, secretary of war, washington.
dear sir: i have been furnished a copy of your letter of april st
to general grant, signifying your disapproval of the terms on which
general johnston proposed to disarm and disperse the insurgents, on
condition of amnesty, etc. i admit my folly in embracing in a
military convention any civil matters; but, unfortunately, such is
the nature of our situation that they seem inextricably united, and
i understood from you at savannah that the financial state of the
country demanded military success, and would warrant a little
bending to policy.
when i had my conference with general johnston i had the public
examples before me of general grant's terms to lee's army, and
general weitzel's invitation to the virginia legislature to
assemble at richmond.
i still believe the general government of the united states has
made a mistake; but that is none of my business--mine is a
different task; and i had flattered myself that, by four years of
patient, unremitting, and successful labor, i deserved no reminder
such as is contained in the last paragraph of your letter to
general grant. you may assure the president that i heed his
suggestion. i am truly, etc.,
w. t. sherman, major-general commanding.
on the same day, but later, i received an answer from general
johnston, agreeing to meet me again at bennett's house the next
day, april th, at noon. he did not even know that general grant
was in raleigh.
general grant advised me to meet him, and to accept his
surrender on the same terms as his with general lee; and on the
th i again went up to durham's station by rail, and rode out to
bennett's house, where we again met, and general johnston, without
hesitation, agreed to, and we executed, the following final
terms:
terms of a military convention, entered into this th day of
april, , at bennett's house, near durham's station., north
carolina, between general joseph e. johnston, commanding the
confederate army, and major-general w. t. sherman, commanding the
united states army in north carolina:
. all acts of war on the part of the troops under general
johnston's command to cease from this date.
. all arms and public property to be deposited at greensboro', and
delivered to an ordnance-officer of the united states army.
. rolls of all the officers and men to be made in duplicate; one
copy to be retained by the commander of the troops, and the other
to be given to an officer to be designated by general sherman. each
officer and man to give his individual obligation in writing not to
take up arms against the government of the united states, until
properly released from this obligation.
. the side-arms of officers, and their private horses and baggage,
to be retained by them.
. this being done, all the officers and men will be permitted to
return to their homes, not to be disturbed by the united states
authorities, so long as they observe their obligation and the laws
in force where they may reside.
w. t. sherman, major-general, commanding united states forces in
north carolina.
j. e. johnston, general, commanding confederate states forces in
north carolina.
approved:
u. s. grant, lieutenant-general.
i returned to raleigh the same evening, and, at my request,
general grant wrote on these terms his approval, and then i thought
the matter was surely at an end. he took the original copy, on the
th returned to newbern, and thence went back to washington.
i immediately made all the orders necessary to carry into effect
the terms of this convention, devolving on general schofield the
details of granting the parole and making the muster-rolls of
prisoners, inventories of property, etc., of general johnston's
army at and about greensboro', north carolina, and on general
wilson the same duties in georgia; but, thus far, i had been
compelled to communicate with the latter through rebel sources, and
general wilson was necessarily confused by the conflict of orders
and information. i deemed it of the utmost importance to establish
for him a more reliable base of information and supply, and
accordingly resolved to go in person to savannah for that purpose.
but, before starting, i received a new york times, of april th,
containing the following extraordinary communications:
[first bulletin]
war department washington, april , .
yesterday evening a bearer of dispatches arrived from general
sherman. an agreement for a suspension of hostilities, and a
memorandum of what is called a basis for peace, had been entered
into on the th inst. by general sherman, with the rebel general
johnston. brigadier-general breckenridge was present at the
conference.
a cabinet meeting was held at eight o'clock in the evening, at
which the action of general sherman was disapproved by the
president, by the secretary of war, by general grant, and by every
member of the cabinet. general sherman was ordered to resume
hostilities immediately, and was directed that the instructions
given by the late president, in the following telegram, which was
penned by mr. lincoln himself, at the capitol, on the night of the
d of march, were approved by president andrew johnson, and were
reiterated to govern the action of military commanders.
on the night of the d of march, while president lincoln and his
cabinet were at the capitol, a telegram from general grant was
brought to the secretary of war, informing him that general lee had
requested an interview or conference, to make an arrangement for
terms of peace. the letter of general lee was published in a letter
to davis and to the rebel congress. general grant's telegram was
submitted to mr. lincoln, who, after pondering a few minutes, took
up his pen and wrote with his own hand the following reply, which
he submitted to the secretary of state and secretary of war. it was
then dated, addressed, and signed, by the secretary of war, and
telegraphed to general grant:
washington, march , - p.m.
lieutenant-general grant:
the president directs me to say to you that he wishes you to have
no conference with general lee, unless it be for the capitulation
of general lee's army, or on some minor or purely military matter.
he instructs me to say that you are not to decide, discuss, or
confer upon any political questions. such questions the president
holds in his own hands, and will submit them to no military
conferences or conventions.
meantime you are to press to the utmost your military
advantages.
edwin m. stanton, secretary of war.
the orders of general sherman to general stoneman to withdraw from
salisbury and join him will probably open the way for davis to
escape to mexico or europe with his plunder, which is reported to
be very large, including not only the plunder of the richmond
banks, but previous accumulations.
a dispatch received by this department from richmond says: "it is
stated here, by respectable parties, that the amount of specie
taken south by jeff. davis and his partisans is very large,
including not only the plunder of the richmond banks, but previous
accumulations. they hope, it is said, to make terms with general
sherman, or some other commander, by which they will be permitted,
with their effects, including this gold plunder, to go to mexico or
europe. johnston's negotiations look to this end."
after the cabinet meeting last night, general grant started for
north carolina, to direct operations against johnston's army.
edwin m. stanton, secretary of war.
here followed the terms, and mr. stanton's ten reasons for
rejecting them.
the publication of this bulletin by authority was an outrage on
me, for mr. stanton had failed to communicate to me in advance, as
was his duty, the purpose of the administration to limit our
negotiations to purely military matters; but, on the contrary, at
savannah he had authorized me to control all matters, civil and
military.
by this bulletin, he implied that i had previously been
furnished with a copy of his dispatch of march d to general grant,
which was not so; and he gave warrant to the impression, which was
sown broadcast, that i might be bribed by banker's gold to permit
davis to escape. under the influence of this, i wrote general grant
the following letter of april th, which has been published in the
proceedings of the committee on the conduct of the war.
i regarded this bulletin of mr. stanton as a personal and
official insult, which i afterward publicly resented.
in the field, raleigh, north carolina, april ,.
lieutenant-general u. s. grant, general-in-chief, washington, d.
general: since you left me yesterday, i have seen the new york
times of the th, containing a budget of military news,
authenticated by the signature of the secretary of war, hon. e. m.
stanton, which is grouped in such a way as to give the public very
erroneous impressions. it embraces a copy of the basis of agreement
between myself and general johnston, of april th, with comments,
which it will be time enough to discuss two or three years hence,
after the government has experimented a little more in the
machinery by which power reaches the scattered people of the vast
country known as the "south."
in the mean time, however, i did think that my rank (if not past
services) entitled me at least to trust that the secretary of war
would keep secret what was communicated for the use of none but the
cabinet, until further inquiry could be made, instead of giving
publicity to it along with documents which i never saw, and drawing
therefrom inferences wide of the truth. i never saw or had
furnished me a copy of president lincoln's dispatch to you of the
d of march, nor did mr. stanton or any human being ever convey to
me its substance, or any thing like it. on the contrary, i had seen
general weitzel's invitation to the virginia legislature, made in
mr. lincoln's very presence, and failed to discover any other
official hint of a plan of reconstruction, or any ideas calculated
to allay the fears of the people of the south, after the
destruction of their armies and civil authorities would leave them
without any government whatever.
we should not drive a people into anarchy, and it is simply
impossible for our military power to reach all the masses of their
unhappy country.
i confess i did not desire to drive general johnston's army into
bands of armed men, going about without purpose, and capable only
of infinite mischief. but you saw, on your arrival here, that i had
my army so disposed that his escape was only possible in a
disorganized shape; and as you did not choose to "direct military
operations in this quarter," i inferred that you were satisfied
with the military situation; at all events, the instant i learned
what was proper enough, the disapproval of the president, i acted
in such a manner as to compel the surrender of general johnston's
whole army on the same terms which you had prescribed to general
lee's army, when you had it surrounded and in your absolute
power.
mr. stanton, in stating that my orders to general stoneman were
likely to result in the escape of "mr. davis to mexico or europe,"
is in deep error. general stoneman was not at "salisbury," but had
gone back to "statesville." davis was between us, and therefore
stoneman was beyond him. by turning toward me he was approaching
davis, and, had he joined me as ordered, i would have had a mounted
force greatly needed for davis's capture, and for other purposes.
even now i don't know that mr. stanton wants davis caught, and as
my official papers, deemed sacred, are hastily published to the
world, it will be imprudent for me to state what has been done in
that regard.
as the editor of the times has (it may be) logically and fairly
drawn from this singular document the conclusion that i am
insubordinate, i can only deny the intention.
i have never in my life questioned or disobeyed an order, though
many and many a time have i risked my life, health, and reputation,
in obeying orders, or even hints to execute plans and purposes, not
to my liking. it is not fair to withhold from me the plans and
policy of government (if any there be), and expect me to guess at
them; for facts and events appear quite different from different
stand-points. for four years i have been in camp dealing with
soldiers, and i can assure you that the conclusion at which the
cabinet arrived with such singular unanimity differs from mine. i
conferred freely with the best officers in this army as to the
points involved in this controversy, and, strange to say, they were
singularly unanimous in the other conclusion. they will learn with
pain and amazement that i am deemed insubordinate, and wanting in
commonsense; that i, who for four years have labored day and night,
winter and summer, who have brought an army of seventy thousand men
in magnificent condition across a country hitherto deemed
impassable, and placed it just where it was wanted, on the day
appointed, have brought discredit on our government! i do not wish
to boast of this, but i do say that it entitled me to the courtesy
of being consulted, before publishing to the world a proposition
rightfully submitted to higher authority for adjudication, and then
accompanied by statements which invited the dogs of the press to be
let loose upon me. it is true that non-combatants, men who sleep in
comfort and security while we watch on the distant lines, are
better able to judge than we poor soldiers, who rarely see a
newspaper, hardly hear from our families, or stop long enough to
draw our pay. i envy not the task of "reconstruction," and am
delighted that the secretary of war has relieved me of it.
as you did not undertake to assume the management of the affairs of
this army, i infer that, on personal inspection, your mind arrived
at a different conclusion from that of the secretary of war. i will
therefore go on to execute your orders to the conclusion, and, when
done, will with intense satisfaction leave to the civil authorities
the execution of the task of which they seem so jealous. but, as an
honest man and soldier, i invite them to go back to nashville and
follow my path, for they will see some things and hear some things
that may disturb their philosophy.
with sincere respect,
w. t. sherman, major-general commanding.
p. s.--as mr. stanton's most singular paper has been published, i
demand that this also be made public, though i am in no manner
responsible to the press, but to the law, and my proper
superiors.
w. t. s., major-general.
on the th i summoned all the army and corps commanders
together at my quarters in the governor's mansion at raleigh, where
every thing was explained to them, and all orders for the future
were completed. generals schofield, terry, and kilpatrick, were to
remain on duty in the department of north carolina, already
commanded by general schofield, and the right and left wings were
ordered to march under their respective commanding generals north
by easy stages to richmond, virginia, there to await my return from
the south.
on the th of april, with a part of my personal staff, i
proceeded by rail to wilmington, north carolina, where i found
generals hawley and potter, and the little steamer russia, captain
smith, awaiting me. after a short pause in wilmington, we embarked,
and proceeded down the coast to port royal and the savannah river,
which we reached on the st of may. there captain hoses, who had
just come from general wilson at macon, met us, bearing letters for
me and general grant, in which general wilson gave a brief summary
of his operations up to date. he had marched from eastport,
mississippi, five hundred miles in thirty days, took six thousand
three hundred prisoners, twenty-three colors, and one hundred and
fifty-six guns, defeating forrest, scattering the militia, and
destroying every railroad, iron establishment, and factory, in
north alabama and georgia.
he spoke in the highest terms of his cavalry, as "cavalry,"
claiming that it could not be excelled, and he regarded his corps
as a model for modern cavalry in organization, armament, and
discipline. its strength was given at thirteen thousand five
hundred men and horses on reaching macon. of course i was extremely
gratified at his just confidence, and saw that all he wanted for
efficient action was a sure base of supply, so that he need no
longer depend for clothing, ammunition, food, and forage, on the
country, which, now that war had ceased, it was our solemn duty to
protect, instead of plunder. i accordingly ordered the captured
steamer jeff. davis to be loaded with stores, to proceed at once up
the savannah river to augusta, with a small detachment of troops to
occupy the arsenal, and to open communication with general wilson
at macon; and on the next day, may d, this steamer was followed by
another with a fall cargo of clothing, sugar, coffee, and bread,
sent from hilton head by the department commander, general
gillmore, with a stronger guard commanded by general molineux.
leaving to general gillmore, who was present, and in whose
department general wilson was, to keep up the supplies at augusta,
and to facilitate as far as possible general wilson's operations
inland, i began my return on the d of may. we went into charleston
harbor, passing the ruins of old forts moultrie and sumter without
landing. we reached the city of charleston, which was held by part
of the division of general john p. hatch, the same that we had left
at pocotaligo. we walked the old familiar streets--broad, king,
meeting, etc.--but desolation and ruin were everywhere. the heart
of the city had been burned during the bombardment, and the rebel
garrison at the time of its final evacuation had fired the
railroad-depots, which fire had spread, and was only subdued by our
troops after they had reached the city.
i inquired for many of my old friends, but they were dead or
gone, and of them all i only saw a part of the family of mrs.
pettigru. i doubt whether any city was ever more terribly punished
than charleston, but, as her people had for years been agitating
for war and discord, and had finally inaugurated the civil war by
an attack on the small and devoted garrison of major anderson, sent
there by the general government to defend them, the judgment of the
world will be, that charleston deserved the fate that befell her.
resuming our voyage, we passed into cape fear river by its mouth at
fort caswell and smithville, and out by the new channel at fort
fisher, and reached morehead city on the th of may. we found there
the revenue-cutter wayanda, on board of which were the
chief-justice, mr. chase, and his daughter nettie, now mrs. hoyt.
the chief-justice at that moment was absent on a visit to newbern,
but came back the next day. meantime, by means of the telegraph, i
was again in correspondence with general schofield at raleigh. he
had made great progress in paroling the officers and men of
johnston's army at greensboro', but was embarrassed by the utter
confusion and anarchy that had resulted from a want of
understanding on many minor points, and on the political questions
that had to be met at the instant. in order to facilitate the
return to their homes of the confederate officers and men, he had
been forced to make with general johnston the following
supplemental terms, which were of course ratified and
approved:
. the field transportation to be loaned to the troops for their
march to their homes, and for subsequent use in their industrial
pursuits. artillery-horses may be used in field-transportation, if
necessary.
. each brigade or separate body to retain a number of arms equal
to one-seventh of its effective strength, which, when the troops
reach the capitals of their states, will be disposed of as the
general commanding the department may direct.
. private horses, and other private property of both officers and
men, to be retained by them.
. the commanding general of the military division of west
mississippi, major-general canby, will be requested to give
transportation by water, from mobile or new orleans, to the troops
from arkansas and texas.
. the obligations of officers and soldiers to be signed by their
immediate commanders.
. naval forces within the limits of general johnston's command to
be included in the terms of this convention.
j. m. schofield, major-general,
commanding united states forces in north carolina.
j. e. johnston, general,
commanding confederate states forces in north
carolina.
the total number of prisoners of war parolled by
general schofield, at greensboro', north carolina,
as afterward officially reported, amounted to
and the total number who surrendered in georgia
and florida, as reported by general j. h. wilson,
was
aggregate surrendered under the capitulation of
general j. e. johnston
on the morning of the th i also received from general schofield
this dispatch:
raleigh, north carolina, may , .
to major-general w: t. sherman, morehead city:
when general grant was here, as you doubtless recollect, he said
the lines (for trade and intercourse) had been extended to embrace
this and other states south. the order, it seems, has been modified
so as to include only virginia and tennessee. i think it would be
an act of wisdom to open this state to trade at once.
i hope the government will make known its policy as to the organs
of state government without delay. affairs must necessarily be in a
very unsettled state until that is done. the people are now in a
mood to accept almost anything which promises a definite
settlement. "what is to be done with the freedmen?" is the question
of all, and it is the all important question. it requires prompt
and wise notion to prevent the negroes from becoming a huge
elephant on our hands. if i am to govern this state, it is
important for me to know it at once. if another is to be sent here,
it cannot be done too soon, for he probably will undo the most that
i shall have done. i shall be glad to hear from you fully, when you
have time to write. i will send your message to general wilson at
once.
j. m. schofield, major-general.
i was utterly without instructions from any source on the points
of general schofield's inquiry, and under the existing state of
facts could not even advise him, for by this time i was in
possession of the second bulletin of mr. stanton, published in all
the northern papers, with comments that assumed that i was a common
traitor and a public enemy; and high officials had even instructed
my own subordinates to disobey my lawful orders. general halleck,
who had so long been in washington as the chief of staff, had been
sent on the st of april to richmond, to command the armies of the
potomac and james, in place of general grant, who had transferred
his headquarters to the national capital, and he (general halleck)
was therefore in supreme command in virginia, while my command over
north carolina had never been revoked or modified.
[second bulletin.]
war department, washington, april  . a.m.
to major-general dix:
the department has received the following dispatch from
major-general halleck, commanding the military division of the
james. generals canby and thomas were instructed some days ago that
sherman's arrangements with johnston were disapproved by the
president, and they were ordered to disregard it and push the enemy
in every direction.
e. m. stanton, secretary of war.
richmond, virginia, april -. p.m.
hon. e. m. stanton, secretary of war:
generals meade, sheridan, and wright, are acting under orders to
pay no regard to any truce or orders of general sherman respecting
hostilities, on the ground that sherman's agreement could bind his
command only, and no other.
they are directed to push forward, regardless of orders from any
one except from general grant, and cut off johnston's
retreat.
beauregard has telegraphed to danville that a new arrangement has
been made with sherman, and that the advance of the sixth corps was
to be suspended until further orders.
i have telegraphed back to obey no orders of sherman, but to push
forward as rapidly as possible.
the bankers here have information to-day that jeff. davis's specie
is moving south from goldsboro', in wagons, as fast as
possible.
i suggest that orders be telegraphed, through general thomas, that
wilson obey no orders from sherman, and notifying him and canby,
and all commanders on the mississippi, to take measures to
intercept the rebel chiefs and their plunder.
the specie taken with them is estimated here at from six to
thirteen million dollars.
h. w. halleck, major-general commanding.
subsequently, before the committee on the conduct of the war, in
washington, on the d of may, i testified fully on this whole
matter, and will abide the judgment of the country on the
patriotism and wisdom of my public conduct in this connection.
general halleck's measures to capture general johnston's army,
actually surrendered to me at the time, at greensboro', on the th
of april, simply excited my contempt for a judgment such as he was
supposed to possess. the assertion that jeff. davis's specie-train,
of six to thirteen million dollars, was reported to be moving south
from goldsboro' in wagons as fast as possible, found plenty of
willing ears, though my army of eighty thousand men had been at
goldsboro' from march d to the date of his dispatch, april th;
and such a train would have been composed of from fifteen to
thirty-two six-mule teams to have hauled this specie, even if it
all were in gold. i suppose the exact amount of treasure which
davis had with him is now known to a cent; some of it was paid to
his escort, when it disbanded at and near washington, georgia, and
at the time of his capture he had a small parcel of gold and silver
coin, not to exceed ten thousand dollars, which is now retained in
the united states treasury-vault at washington, and shown to the
curious.
the thirteen millions of treasure, with which jeff. davis was to
corrupt our armies and buy his escape, dwindled down to the
contents of a hand-valise!
to say that i was merely angry at the tone and substance of
these published bulletins of the war department, would hardly
express the state of my feelings. i was outraged beyond measure,
and was resolved to resent the insult, cost what it might. i went
to the wayanda and showed them to mr. chase, with whom i had a long
and frank conversation, during which he explained to me the
confusion caused in washington by the assassination of mr. lincoln,
the sudden accession to power of mr. johnson, who was then supposed
to be bitter and vindictive in his feelings toward the south, and
the wild pressure of every class of politicians to enforce on the
new president their pet schemes. he showed me a letter of his own,
which was in print, dated baltimore, april th, and another of
april th, addressed to the president, urging him to recognize the
freedmen as equal in all respects to the whites. he was the first
man, of any authority or station, who ever informed me that the
government of the united states would insist on extending to the
former slaves of the south the elective franchise, and he gave as a
reason the fact that the slaves, grateful for their freedom, for
which they were indebted to the armies and government of the north,
would, by their votes, offset the disaffected and rebel element of
the white population of the south. at that time quite a storm was
prevailing at sea, outside, and our two vessels lay snug at the
wharf at morehead city. i saw a good deal of mr. chase, and several
notes passed between us, of which i have the originals yet. always
claiming that the south had herself freed all her slaves by
rebellion, and that mr. lincoln's proclamation of freedom (of
september , ) was binding on all officers of the general
government, i doubted the wisdom of at once clothing them with the
elective franchise, without some previous preparation and
qualification; and then realized the national loss in the death at
that critical moment of mr. lincoln, who had long pondered over the
difficult questions involved, who, at all events, would have been
honest and frank, and would not have withheld from his army
commanders at least a hint that would have been to them a guide. it
was plain to me, therefore, that the manner of his assassination
had stampeded the civil authorities in washington, had unnerved
them, and that they were then undecided as to the measures
indispensably necessary to prevent anarchy at the south.
on the th of may the storm subsided, and we put to sea, mr.
chase to the south, on his proposed tour as far as new orleans, and
i for james river. i reached fortress monroe on the th, and thence
telegraphed my arrival to general grant, asking for orders. i found
at fortress monroe a dispatch from general halleck, professing
great friendship, and inviting me to accept his hospitality at
richmond. i answered by a cipher-dispatch that i had seen his
dispatch to mr. stanton, of april th, embraced in the second
bulletin, which i regarded as insulting, declined his hospitality,
and added that i preferred we should not meet as i passed through
richmond. i thence proceeded to city point in the russia, and on to
manchester, opposite richmond, via petersburg, by rail. i found
that both wings of the army had arrived from raleigh, and were in
camp in and around manchester, whence i again telegraphed general
grant, an the th of may, for orders, and also reported my arrival
to general halleck by letter. i found that general halleck had
ordered general davis's corps (the fourteenth) for review by
himself. this i forbade. all the army knew of the insult that had
been made me by the secretary of war and general halleck, and
watched me closely to see if i would tamely submit. during the th
i made a full and complete report of all these events, from the
last report made at goldsboro' up to date, and the next day
received orders to continue the march to alexandria, near
washington.
on the morning of the th we crossed the pontoon-bridge at
richmond, marched through that city, and out on the hanover court
house road, general slocum's left wing leading. the right wing
(general logan) followed the next day, viz., the th. meantime,
general o. o. howard had been summoned to washington to take charge
of the new bureau of refugees, freedmen, and abandoned lands, and,
from that time till the army was finally disbanded, general john a.
logan was in command of the right wing, and of the army of the
tennessee. the left wing marched through hanover court house, and
thence took roads well to the left by chilesburg; the fourteenth
corps by new market and culpepper, manassas, etc.; the twentieth
corps by spotsylvania court-house and chancellorsville. the right
wing followed the more direct road by fredericksburg. on my way
north i endeavored to see as much of the battle-fields of the army
of the potomac as i could, and therefore shifted from one column to
the other, visiting en route hanover court-house, spotsylvania,
fredericksburg, dumfries, etc., reaching alexandria during the
afternoon of may th, and pitched my camp by the road side, about
half-way between alexandria and the long bridge. during the same
and next day the whole army reached alexandria, and camped round
about it; general meade's army of the potomac had possession of the
camps above, opposite washington and georgetown. the next day (by
invitation) i went over to washington and met many friends--among
them general grant and president johnson. the latter occupied rooms
in the house on the corner of fifteenth and h streets, belonging to
mr. hooper. he was extremely cordial to me, and knowing that i was
chafing under the censures of the war department, especially of the
two war bulletins of mr. stanton, he volunteered to say that he
knew of neither of them till seen in the newspapers, and that mr.
stanton had shown neither to him nor to any of his associates in
the cabinet till they were published. nearly all the members of the
cabinet made similar assurances to me afterward, and, as mr.
stanton made no friendly advances, and offered no word of
explanation or apology, i declined general grant's friendly offices
for a reconciliation, but, on the contrary, resolved to resent what
i considered an insult, as publicly as it was made. my brother,
senator sherman, who was mr. stanton's neighbor, always insisted
that mr. stanton had been frightened by the intended assassination
of himself, and had become embittered thereby. at all events, i
found strong military guards around his house, as well as all the
houses occupied by the cabinet and by the principal officers of
government; and a sense of insecurity pervaded washington, for
which no reason existed.
on the th i received a copy of war department special order
no. , adjutant-general's office, of may th, ordering a grand
review, by the president and cabinet, of all the armies then near
washington; general meade's to occur on tuesday, may d, mine on
wednesday, the th; and on the th i made the necessary orders
for my part. meantime i had also arranged (with general grant's
approval) to remove after the review, my armies from the south side
of the potomac to the north; both for convenience and because our
men had found that the grounds assigned them had been used so long
for camps that they were foul and unfit.
by invitation i was on the reviewing-stand, and witnessed the
review of the army of the potomac (on the d), commanded by
general meade in person. the day was beautiful, and the pageant was
superb. washington was full of strangers, who filled the streets in
holiday-dress, and every house was decorated with flags. the army
marched by divisions in close column around the capitol, down
pennsylvania avenue, past the president and cabinet, who occupied a
large stand prepared for the occasion, directly in front of the
white house.
i had telegraphed to lancaster for mrs. sherman, who arrived
that day, accompanied by her father, the hon. thomas ewing, and my
son tom, then eight years old.
during the afternoon and night of the d, the fifteenth,
seventeenth, and twentieth corps, crossed long bridge, bivouacked
in the streets about the capitol, and the fourteenth corps closed
up to the bridge. the morning of the th was extremely beautiful,
and the ground was in splendid order for our review. the streets
were filled with people to see the pageant, armed with bouquets of
flowers for their favorite regiments or heroes, and every thing was
propitious. punctually at  a.m. the signal-gun was fired, when in
person, attended by general howard and all my staff, i rode slowly
down pennsylvania avenue, the crowds of men, women, and children,
densely lining the sidewalks, and almost obstructing the way. we
were followed close by general logan and the head of the fifteenth
corps. when i reached the treasury-building, and looked back, the
sight was simply magnificent. the column was compact, and the
glittering muskets looked like a solid mass of steel, moving with
the regularity of a pendulum. we passed the treasury building, in
front of which and of the white house was an immense throng of
people, for whom extensive stands had been prepared on both sides
of the avenue. as i neared the brick-house opposite the lower
corner of lafayette square, some one asked me to notice mr. seward,
who, still feeble and bandaged for his wounds, had been removed
there that he might behold the troops. i moved in that direction
and took off my hat to mr. seward, who sat at an upper window. he
recognized the salute, returned it, and then we rode on steadily
past the president, saluting with our swords. all on his stand
arose and acknowledged the salute. then, turning into the gate of
the presidential grounds, we left our horses with orderlies, and
went upon the stand, where i found mrs. sherman, with her father
and son. passing them, i shook hands with the president, general
grant, and each member of the cabinet. as i approached mr. stanton,
he offered me his hand, but i declined it publicly, and the fact
was universally noticed. i then took my post on the left of the
president, and for six hours and a half stood, while the army
passed in the order of the fifteenth, seventeenth, twentieth, and
fourteenth corps. it was, in my judgment, the most magnificent army
in existence--sixty-five thousand men, in splendid physique, who
had just completed a march of nearly two thousand miles in a
hostile country, in good drill, and who realized that they were
being closely scrutinized by thousands of their fellow-countrymen
and by foreigners. division after division passed, each commander
of an army corps or division coming on the stand during the passage
of his command, to be presented to the president, cabinet, and
spectators. the steadiness and firmness of the tread, the careful
dress on the guides, the uniform intervals between the companies,
all eyes directly to the front, and the tattered and bullet-ridden
flags, festooned with flowers, all attracted universal notice. many
good people, up to that time, had looked upon our western army as a
sort of mob; but the world then saw, and recognized the fact, that
it was an army in the proper sense, well organized, well commanded
and disciplined; and there was no wonder that it had swept through
the south like a tornado. for six hours and a half that strong
tread of the army of the west resounded along pennsylvania avenue;
not a soul of that vast crowd of spectators left his place; and,
when the rear of the column had passed by, thousands of the
spectators still lingered to express their sense of confidence in
the strength of a government which could claim such an army.
some little scenes enlivened the day, and called for the
laughter and cheers of the crowd. each division was followed by six
ambulances, as a representative of its baggage-train. some of the
division commanders had added, by way of variety, goats,
milch-cows, and pack-mules, whose loads consisted of game-cocks,
poultry, hams, etc., and some of them had the families of freed
slaves along, with the women leading their children. each division
was preceded by its corps of black pioneers, armed with picks and
spades. these marched abreast in double ranks, keeping perfect
dress and step, and added much to the interest of the occasion. on
the whole, the grand review was a splendid success, and was a
fitting conclusion to the campaign and the war.
i will now conclude by a copy of my general orders taking leave
of the army, which ended my connection with the war, though i
afterward visited and took a more formal leave of the officers and
men on july , , at louisville, kentucky:
washington, d.c. may , 
the general commanding announces to the armies of the tennessee and
georgia that the time has come for us to part. our work is done,
and armed enemies no longer defy us. some of you will go to your
homes, and others will be retained in military service till further
orders.
and now that we are all about to separate, to mingle with the civil
world, it becomes a pleasing duty to recall to mind the situation
of national affairs when, but little more than a year ago, we were
gathered about the cliffs of lookout mountain, and all the future
was wrapped in doubt and uncertainty.
three armies had come together from distant fields, with separate
histories, yet bound by one common cause--the union of our country,
and the perpetuation of the government of our inheritance. there is
no need to recall to your memories tunnel hill, with rocky-face
mountain and buzzard-roost gap, and the ugly forts of dalton
behind.
we were in earnest, and paused not for danger and difficulty, but
dashed through snake-creek gap and fell on resaca; then on to the
etowah, to dallas, kenesaw; and the heats of summer found us on the
banks of the chattahoochee, far from home, and dependent on a
single road for supplies. again we were not to be held back by any
obstacle, and crossed over and fought four hard battles for the
possession of the citadel of atlanta. that was the crisis of our
history. a doubt still clouded our future, but we solved the
problem, destroyed atlanta, struck boldly across the state of
georgia, severed all the main arteries of life to our enemy, and
christmas found us at savannah.
waiting there only long enough to fill our wagons, we again began a
march which, for peril, labor, and results, will compare with any
ever made by an organized army. the floods of the savannah, the
swamps of the combahee and edisto, the "high hills" and rocks of
the santee, the flat quagmires of the pedee and cape fear rivers,
were all passed in midwinter, with its floods and rains, in the
face of an accumulating enemy; and, after the battles of
averysboro' and bentonsville, we once more came out of the
wilderness, to meet our friends at goldsboro'. even then we paused
only long enough to get new clothing, to reload our wagons, again
pushed on to raleigh and beyond, until we met our enemy suing for
peace, instead of war, and offering to submit to the injured laws
of his and our country. as long as that enemy was defiant, nor
mountains nor rivers, nor swamps, nor hunger, nor cold, had checked
us; but when he, who had fought us hard and persistently, offered
submission, your general thought it wrong to pursue him farther,
and negotiations followed, which resulted, as you all know, in his
surrender.
how far the operations of this army contributed to the final
overthrow of the confederacy and the peace which now dawns upon us,
must be judged by others, not by us; but that you have done all
that men could do has been admitted by those in authority, and we
have a right to join in the universal joy that fills our land
because the war is over, and our government stands vindicated
before the world by the joint action of the volunteer armies and
navy of the united states.
to such as remain in the service, your general need only remind you
that success in the past was due to hard work and discipline, and
that the same work and discipline are equally important in the
future. to such as go home, he will only say that our favored
country is so grand, so extensive, so diversified in climate, soil,
and productions, that every man may find a home and occupation
suited to his taste; none should yield to the natural impatience
sure to result from our past life of excitement and adventure. you
will be invited to seek new adventures abroad; do not yield to the
temptation, for it will lead only to death and
disappointment.
your general now bids you farewell, with the full belief that, as
in war you have been good soldiers, so in peace you will make good
citizens; and if, unfortunately, new war should arise in our
country, "sherman's army" will be the first to buckle on its old
armor, and come forth to defend and maintain the government of our
inheritance.
by order of major-general w. t. sherman,
l. m. dayton, assistant adjutant-general.
list of the average number of miles marched by the different
army corps of the united states forces under command of
major-general w. t. sherman, united states army, during his
campaigns: -'-'.
th
th
th
th
th
th
corps.
corps.
corps.
corps
corps.
corps.
having thus recorded a summary of events, mostly under my own
personal supervision, during the years from  to , it seems
proper that i should add an opinion of some of the useful military
lessons to be derived therefrom.
that civil war, by reason of the existence of slavery, was
apprehended by most of the leading statesmen of the half-century
preceding its outbreak, is a matter of notoriety. general scott
told me on my arrival at new york, as early as , that the
country was on the eve of civil war; and the southern politicians
openly asserted that it was their purpose to accept as a casus
belli the election of general fremont in ; but, fortunately or
unfortunately, he was beaten by mr. buchanan, which simply
postponed its occurrence for four years. mr. seward had also
publicly declared that no government could possibly exist half
slave and half free; yet the government made no military
preparation, and the northern people generally paid no attention,
took no warning of its coming, and would not realize its existence
till fort sumter was fired on by batteries of artillery, handled by
declared enemies, from the surrounding islands and from the city of
charleston.
general bragg, who certainly was a man of intelligence, and who,
in early life, ridiculed a thousand times, in my hearing, the
threats of the people of south carolina to secede from the federal
union, said to me in new orleans, in february, , that he was
convinced that the feeling between the slave and free states had
become so embittered that it was better to part in peace; better to
part anyhow; and, as a separation was inevitable, that the south
should begin at once, because the possibility of a successful
effort was yearly lessened by the rapid and increasing inequality
between the two sections, from the fact that all the european
immigrants were coming to the northern states and territories, and
none to the southern.
the slave population m  was near four millions, and the
money value thereof not far from twenty-five hundred million
dollars. now, ignoring the moral side of the question, a cause that
endangered so vast a moneyed interest was an adequate cause of
anxiety and preparation, and the northern leaders surely ought to
have foreseen the danger and prepared for it. after the election of
mr. lincoln in , there was no concealment of the declaration
and preparation for war in the south. in louisiana, as i have
related, men were openly enlisted, officers were appointed, and war
was actually begun, in january, . the forts at the mouth of the
mississippi were seized, and occupied by garrisons that hauled down
the united states flag and hoisted that of the state. the united
states arsenal at baton rouge was captured by new orleans militia,
