the rev. robert wringhim was now to send for, to release his beloved
ward. the messenger found him at table, with a number of the leaders of
the whig faction, the marquis of annandale being in the chair; and, the
prisoner's note being produced, wringhim read it aloud, accompanying it
with some explanatory remarks. the circumstances of the case being thus
magnified and distorted, it excited the utmost abhorrence, both of the
deed and the perpetrators, among the assembled faction. they declaimed
against the act as an unnatural attempt on the character, and even the
life, of an unfortunate brother, who had been expelled from his
father's house. and, as party spirit was the order of the day, an
attempt was made to lay the burden of it to that account. in short, the
young culprit got some of the best blood of the land to enter as his
securities, and was set at liberty. but, when wringhim perceived the
plight that he was in, he took him, as he was, and presented him to his
honourable patrons. this raised the indignation against the young laird
and his associates a thousand-fold, which actually roused the party to
temporary madness. they were, perhaps, a little excited by the wine and
spirits they had swallowed; else a casual quarrel between two young
men, at tennis, could not have driven them to such extremes. but
certain it is that, from one at first arising to address the party on
the atrocity of the offence, both in a moral and political point of
view, on a sudden there were six on their feet, at the same time,
expatiating on it; and, in a very short time thereafter, everyone in
the room was up talking with the utmost vociferation, all on the same
subject, and all taking the same side in the debate.
in the midst of this confusion, someone or other issued from the house,
which was at the back of the canongate, calling out: "a plot, a plot!
treason, treason! down with the bloody incendiaries at the black bull!"
the concourse of people that were assembled in edinburgh at that time
was prodigious; and, as they were all actuated by political motives,
they wanted only a ready-blown coal to set the mountain on fire. the
evening being fine, and the streets thronged, the cry ran from mouth to
mouth through the whole city. more than that, the mob that had of late
been gathered to the door of the black bull had, by degrees, dispersed;
but, they being young men, and idle vagrants, they had only spread
themselves over the rest of the street to lounge in search of further
amusement: consequently, a word was sufficient to send them back to
their late rendezvous, where they had previously witnessed something
they did not much approve of.
the master of the tavern was astonished at seeing the mob again
assembling; and that with such hurry and noise. but, his inmates being
all of the highest respectability, he judged himself sure of
protection, or at least of indemnity. he had two large parties in his
house at the time; the largest of which was of the revolutionist
faction. the other consisted of our young tennis-players, and their
associates, who were all of the jacobite order; or, at all events,
leaned to the episcopal side. the largest party were in a front room;
and the attack of the mob fell first on their windows, though rather
with fear and caution. jingle went one pane; then a loud hurrah; and
that again was followed by a number of voices, endeavouring to restrain
the indignation from venting itself in destroying the windows, and to
turn it on the inmates. the whigs, calling the landlord, inquired what
the assault meant: he cunningly answered that he suspected it was some
of the youths of the cavalier, or high-church party, exciting the mob
against them. the party consisted mostly of young gentlemen, by that
time in a key to engage in any row; and, at all events, to suffer
nothing from the other party, against whom their passions were mightily
inflamed.
the landlord, therefore, had no sooner given them the spirit-rousing
intelligence than everyone, as by instinct, swore his own natural oath,
and grasped his own natural weapon. a few of those of the highest rank
were armed with swords, which they boldly drew; those of the
subordinate orders immediately flew to such weapons as the room,
kitchen, and scullery afforded—such as tongs, pokers, spits, racks,
and shovels; and breathing vengeance on the prelatic party, the
children of antichrist and the heirs of d—n—t—n! the barterers of
the liberties of their country, and betrayers of the most sacred
trust—thus elevated, and thus armed, in the cause of right, justice,
and liberty, our heroes rushed to the street, and attacked the mob with
such violence that they broke the mass in a moment, and dispersed their
thousands like chaff before the wind. the other party of young
jacobites, who sat in a room farther from the front, and were those
against whom the fury of the mob was meant to have been directed, knew
nothing of this second uproar, till the noise of the sally made by the
whigs assailed their ears; being then informed that the mob had
attacked the house on account of the treatment they themselves had
given to a young gentleman of the adverse faction, and that another
jovial party had issued from the house in their defence, and was now
engaged in an unequal combat, the sparks likewise flew, to the field to
back their defenders with all their prowess, without troubling their
heads about who they were.
a mob is like a spring tide in an eastern storm, that retires only to
return with more overwhelming fury. the crowd was taken by surprise
when such a strong and well-armed party issued from the house with so
great fury, laying all prostrate that came in their way. those who were
next to the door, and were, of course, the first whom the imminent
danger assailed, rushed backwards among the crowd with their whole
force. the black bull standing in a small square half-way between the
high street and the cowgate, and the entrance to it being by two
closes, into these the pressure outwards was simultaneous, and
thousands were moved to an involuntary flight, they knew not why.
but the high street of edinburgh, which they soon reached, is a
dangerous place in which to make an open attack upon a mob. and it
appears that the entrances to the tavern had been somewhere near to the
cross, on the south side of the street; for the crowd fled with great
expedition, both to the cast and west, and the conquerors, separating
themselves as chance directed, pursued impetuously, wounding and
maiming as they flew. but it so chanced that, before either of the
wings had followed the flying squadrons of their enemies for the space
of a hundred yards each way, the devil an enemy they had to pursue! the
multitude had vanished like so many thousands of phantoms! what could
our heroes do? why, they faced about to return towards their citadel,
the black bull. but that feat was not so easily, nor so readily
accomplished as they divined. the unnumbered alleys on each side of the
street had swallowed up the multitude in a few seconds; but from these
they were busy reconnoitring; and perceiving the deficiency in the
number of their assailants, the rush from both sides of the street was
as rapid, and as wonderful, as the disappearance of the crowd had been
a few minutes before. each close vomited out its levies, and these
better armed with missiles than when they sought it for a temporary
retreat. woe then to our two columns of victorious whigs! the mob
actually closed around them as they would have swallowed them up; and,
in the meanwhile, shower after shower of the most abominable weapons of
offence were rained in upon them. if the gentlemen were irritated
before, this inflamed them still further; but their danger was now so
apparent they could not shut their eyes on it; therefore, both parties,
as if actuated by the same spirit, made a desperate effort to join, and
the greater part effected it; but some were knocked down, and others
were separated from their friends, and blithe to become silent members
of the mob.
the battle now raged immediately in front of the closes leading to the
black bull; the small body of whig gentlemen was hardly bested, and it
is likely would have been overcome and trampled down every man, had
they not been then and there joined by the young cavaliers; who, fresh
to arms, broke from the wynd, opened the head of the passage, laid
about them manfully, and thus kept up the spirits of the exasperated
whigs, who were the men in fact that wrought the most deray among the
populace.
the town-guard was now on the alert; and two companies of the
cameronian regiment, with the hon. captain douglas, rushed down from
the castle to the scene of action; but, for all the noise and hubbub
that these caused in the street, the combat had become so close and
inveterate that numbers of both sides were taken prisoners fighting
hand to hand, and could scarcely be separated when the guardsmen and
soldiers had them by the necks.
great was the alarm and confusion that night in edinburgh; for everyone
concluded that it was a party scuffle, and, the two parties being so
equal in power, the most serious consequences were anticipated. the
agitation was so prevailing that every party in town, great and small,
was broken up; and the lord-commissioner thought proper to go to the
council chamber himself, even at that late hour, accompanied by the
sheriffs of edinburgh and linlithgow, with sundry noblemen besides, in
order to learn something of the origin of the affray.
for a long time the court was completely puzzled. every gentleman
brought in exclaimed against the treatment he had received, in most
bitter terms, blaming a mob set on him and his friends by the adverse
party, and matters looked extremely ill until at length they began to
perceive that they were examining gentlemen of both parties, and that
they had been doing so from the beginning, almost alternately, so
equally had the prisoners been taken from both parties. finally, it
turned out that a few gentlemen, two-thirds of whom were strenuous
whigs themselves, had joined in mauling the whole whig population of
edinburgh. the investigation disclosed nothing the effect of which was
not ludicrous; and the duke of queensberry, whose aim was at that time
to conciliate the two factions, tried all that he could to turn the
whole fracas into a joke—an unlucky frolic, where no ill was meant on
either side, and which yet had been productive of a great deal.
the greater part of the people went home satisfied; but not so the rev.
robert wringhim. he did all that he could to inflame both judges and
populace against the young cavaliers, especially against the young
laird of dalcastle, whom he represented as an incendiary, set on by an
unnatural parent to slander his mother, and make away with a hapless
and only brother; and, in truth, that declaimer against all human merit
had that sort of powerful, homely, and bitter eloquence which seldom
missed affecting his hearers: the consequence at that time was that he
made the unfortunate affair between the two brothers appear in
extremely bad colours, and the populace retired to their homes
impressed with no very favourable opinion of either the laird of
dalcastle or his son george, neither of whom were there present to
speak for themselves.
as for wringhim himself, he went home to his lodgings, filled with gall
and with spite against the young laird, whom he was made to believe the
aggressor, and that intentionally. but most of all he was filled with
indignation against the father, whom he held in abhorrence at all
times, and blamed solely for this unmannerly attack made on his
favourite ward, namesake, and adopted son; and for the public
imputation of a crime to his own reverence in calling the lad his son,
and thus charging him with a sin against which he was well known to
have levelled all the arrows of church censure with unsparing might.
but, filled as his heart was with some portion of these bad feelings,
to which all flesh is subject, he kept, nevertheless, the fear of the
lord always before his eyes so far as never to omit any of the external
duties of religion, and farther than that man hath no power to pry. he
lodged with the family of a mr. miller, whose lady was originally from
glasgow, and had been a hearer and, of course, a great admirer of mr.
wringhim. in that family he made public worship every evening; and that
night, in his petitions at a throne of grace, he prayed for so many
vials of wrath to be poured on the head of some particular sinner that
the hearers trembled, and stopped their ears. but that he might not
proceed with so violent a measure, amounting to excommunication,
without due scripture warrant, he began the exercise of the evening by
singing the following verses, which it is a pity should ever have been
admitted into a christian psalmody, being so adverse to all its mild
and benevolent principles:
 set thou the wicked over him,
 and upon his right hand
 give thou his greatest enemy,
 even satan, leave to stand.
 and, when by thee he shall be judged,
 let him remembered be;
 and let his prayer be turned to sin
 when he shall call on thee.
 few be his days; and in his room
 his charge another take;
 his children let be fatherless;
 his wife a widow make:
 let god his father's wickedness
 still to remembrance call;
 and never let his mother's sin
 be blotted out at all.
 as he in cursing pleasure took
 so let it to him fall;
 as he delighted not to bless,
 so bless him not at all.
 as cursing he like clothes put on,
 into his bowels so,
 like water, and into his bones
 like oil, down let it go.
young wringhim only knew the full purport of this spiritual song; and
went to his bed better satisfied than ever that his father and brother
were castaways, reprobates, aliens from the church and the true faith,
and cursed in time and eternity.
the next day george and his companions met as usual—all who were not
seriously wounded of them. but, as they strolled about the city, the
rancorous eye and the finger of scorn was pointed against them. none of
them was at first aware of the reason; but it threw a damp over their
spirits and enjoyments, which they could not master. they went to take
a forenoon game at their old play of tennis, not on a match, but by way
of improving themselves; but they had not well taken their places till
young wringhim appeared in his old station, at his brother's right
hand, with looks more demure and determined than ever. his lips were
primmed so close that his mouth was hardly discernible, and his dark
deep eye flashed gleams of holy indignation on the godless set, but
particularly on his brother. his presence acted as a mildew on all
social intercourse or enjoyment; the game was marred, and ended ere
ever it was well begun. there were whisperings apart—the party
separated, and, in order to shake off the blighting influence of this
dogged persecutor, they entered sundry houses of their acquaintances,
with an understanding that they were to meet on the links for a game at
cricket.
they did so; and, stripping off part of their clothes, they began that
violent and spirited game. they had not played five minutes till
wringhim was stalking in the midst of them, and totally impeding the
play. a cry arose from all corners of: "oh, this will never do. kick
him out of the play-ground! knock down the scoundrel; or bind him, and
let him lie in peace."
"by no means," cried george. "it is evident he wants nothing else. pray
do not humour him so much as to touch him with either foot or finger."
then, turning to a friend, he said in a whisper: "speak to him, gordon;
he surely will not refuse to let us have the ground to ourselves, if
you request it of him."
gordon went up to him, and requested of him, civilly, but ardently, "to
retire to a certain distance, else none of them could or would be
answerable, however sore he might be hurt."
he turned disdainfully on his heel, uttered a kind of pulpit hem! and
then added, "i will take my chance of that; hurt me, any of you, at
your peril."
the young gentlemen smiled, through spite and disdain of the dogged
animal. gordon followed him up, and tried to remonstrate with him; but
he let him know that "it was his pleasure to be there at that time;
and, unless he could demonstrate to him what superior right he and his
party had to that ground, in preference to him, and to the exclusion of
all others, he was determined to assert his right, and the rights of
his fellow-citizens, by keeping possession of whatsoever part of that
common field he chose."
"you are no gentleman, sir," said gordon.
"are you one, sir?" said the other.
"yes, sir. i will let you know that i am, by g—!"
"then, thanks be to him whose name you have profaned, i am none. if one
of the party be a gentleman, i do hope in god am not!"
it was now apparent to them all that he was courting obloquy and manual
chastisement from their hands, if by any means he could provoke them
to the deed; and, apprehensive that he had some sinister and deep-laid
design in hunting after such a singular favour, they wisely restrained
one another from inflicting the punishment that each of them yearned to
bestow, personally, and which he so well deserved.
but the unpopularity of the younger george colwan could no longer be
concealed from his associates. it was manifested wherever the populace
were assembled; and his young and intimate friend, adam gordon, was
obliged to warn him of the circumstance that he might not be surprised
at the gentlemen of their acquaintance withdrawing themselves from his
society, as they could not be seen with him without being insulted.
george thanked him; and it was agreed between them that the former
should keep himself retired during the daytime while he remained in
edinburgh, and that at night they should meet together, along with such
of their companions as were disengaged.
george found it every day more and more necessary to adhere to this
system of seclusion; for it was not alone the hisses of the boys and
populace that pursued him—a fiend of more malignant aspect was ever at
his elbow, in the form of his brother. to whatever place of amusement
he betook himself, and however well he concealed his intentions of
going there from all flesh living, there was his brother wringhim also,
and always within a few yards of him, generally about the same
distance, and ever and anon darting looks at him that chilled his very
soul. they were looks that cannot be described; but they were felt
piercing to the bosom's deepest core. they affected even the onlookers
in a very particular manner, for all whose eyes caught a glimpse of
these hideous glances followed them to the object towards which they
were darted: the gentlemanly and mild demeanour of that object
generally calmed their startled apprehensions; for no one ever yet
noted the glances of the young man's eye, in the black coat, at the
face of his brother, who did not at first manifest strong symptoms of
alarm.
george became utterly confounded; not only at the import of this
persecution, but how in the world it came to pass that this
unaccountable being knew all his motions, and every intention of his
heart, as it were intuitively. on consulting his own previous feelings
and resolutions, he found that the circumstances of his going to such
and such a place were often the most casual incidents in nature—the
caprice of a moment had carried him there, and yet he had never sat or
stood many minutes till there was the selfsame being, always in the
same position with regard to himself, as regularly as the shadow is
cast from the substance, or the ray of light from the opposing denser
medium.
for instance, he remembered one day of setting out with the intention
of going to attend divine worship in the high church, and when, within
a short space of its door, he was overtaken by young kilpatrick of
closeburn, who was bound to the grey-friars to see his sweetheart, as
he said: "and if you will go with me, colwan," said he, "i will let you
see her too, and then you will be just as far forward as i am."
george assented at once, and went; and, after taking his seat, he
leaned his head forwards on the pew to repeat over to himself a short
ejaculatory prayer, as had always been his custom on entering the house
of god. when he had done, he lifted his eye naturally towards that
point on his right hand where the fierce apparition of his brother had
been wont to meet his view: there he was, in the same habit, form,
demeanour, and precise point of distance, as usual! george again laid
down his head, and his mind was so astounded that he had nearly fallen
into a swoon. he tried shortly after to muster up courage to look at
the speaker, at the congregation, and at captain kilpatrick's
sweetheart in particular; but the fiendish glances of the young man in
the black clothes were too appalling to be withstood—his eye caught
them whether he was looking that way or not: at length his courage was
fairly mastered, and he was obliged to look down during the remainder
of the service.
by night or by day it was the same. in the gallery of the parliament
house, in the boxes of the play-house, in the church, in the assembly,
in the streets, suburbs, and the fields; and every day, and every hour,
from the first rencounter of the two, the attendance became more and
more constant, more inexplicable, and altogether more alarming and
insufferable, until at last george was fairly driven from society, and
forced to spend his days in his and his father's lodgings with closed
doors. even there, he was constantly harassed with the idea that, the
next time he lifted his eyes, he would to a certainty see that face,
the most repulsive to all his feelings of aught the earth contained.
the attendance of that brother was now become like the attendance of a
demon on some devoted being that had sold himself to destruction; his
approaches as undiscerned, and his looks as fraught with hideous
malignity. it was seldom that he saw him either following him in the
streets, or entering any house or church after him; he only appeared in
his place, george wist not how, or whence; and, having sped so ill in
his first friendly approaches, he had never spoken to his equivocal
attendant a second time.
it came at length into george's head, as he was pondering, by himself,
on the circumstances of this extraordinary attendance, that perhaps his
brother had relented, and, though of so sullen and unaccommodating a
temper that he would not acknowledge it, or beg a reconciliation, it
might be for that very purpose that he followed his steps night and day
in that extraordinary manner. "i cannot for my life see for what other
purpose it can be," thought he. "he never offers to attempt my life;
nor dares he, if he had the inclination; therefore, although his manner
is peculiarly repulsive to me, i shall not have my mind burdened with
the reflection that my own mother's son yearned for a reconciliation
with me and was repulsed by my haughty and insolent behaviour. the next
time he comes to my hand, i am resolved that i will accost him as one
brother ought to address another, whatever it may cost me; and, if i am
still flouted with disdain, then shall the blame rest with him."
after this generous resolution, it was a good while before his
gratuitous attendant appeared at his side again; and george began to
think that his visits were discontinued. the hope was a relief that
could not be calculated; but still george had a feeling that it was too
supreme to last. his enemy had been too pertinacious to abandon his
design, whatever it was. he, however, began to indulge in a little more
liberty, and for several days he enjoyed it with impunity.
george was, from infancy, of a stirring active disposition and could
not endure confinement; and, having been of late much restrained in his
youthful exercises by this singular persecutor, he grew uneasy under
such restraint, and, one morning, chancing to awaken very early, he
arose to make an excursion to the top of arthur's seat, to breathe the
breeze of the dawning, and see the sun arise out of the eastern ocean.
the morning was calm and serene; and as he walked down the south back
of the canongate, towards the palace, the haze was so close around him
that he could not see the houses on the opposite side of the way. as he
passed the lord-commissioner's house, the guards were in attendance,
who cautioned him not to go by the palace, as all the gates would be
shut and guarded for an hour to come, on which he went by the back of
st. anthony's gardens, and found his way into that little romantic
glade adjoining to the saint's chapel and well. he was still involved
in a blue haze, like a dense smoke, but yet in the midst of it the
respiration was the most refreshing and delicious. the grass and the
flowers were loaden with dew; and, on taking off his hat to wipe his
forehead, he perceived that the black glossy fur of which his chaperon
was wrought was all covered with a tissue of the most delicate
silver—a fairy web, composed of little spheres, so minute that no eye
could discern any of them; yet there they were shining in lovely
millions. afraid of defacing so beautiful and so delicate a garnish, he
replaced his hat with the greatest caution, and went on his way light
of heart.
as he approached the swire at the head of the dell—that little
delightful verge from which in one moment the eastern limits and shores
of lothian arise on the view—as he approached it, i say, and a little
space from the height, he beheld, to his astonishment, a bright halo in
the cloud of haze, that rose in a semicircle over his head like a pale
rainbow. he was struck motionless at the view of the lovely vision; for
it so chanced that he had never seen the same appearance before, though
common at early morn. but he soon perceived the cause of the
phenomenon, and that it proceeded from the rays of the sun from a pure
unclouded morning sky striking upon this dense vapour which refracted
them. but, the better all the works of nature are understood, the more
they will be ever admired. that was a scene that would have entranced
the man of science with delight, but which the uninitiated and sordid
man would have regarded less than the mole rearing up his hill in
silence and in darkness.
george did admire this halo of glory, which still grew wider, and less
defined, as he approached the surface, of the cloud. but, to his utter
amazement and supreme delight, he found, on reaching the top of
arthur's seat, that this sublunary rainbow, this terrestrial glory, was
spread in its most vivid hues beneath his feet. still he could not
perceive the body of the sun, although the light behind him was
dazzling; but the cloud of haze lying dense in that deep dell that
separates the hill from the rocks of salisbury, and the dull shadow of
the hill mingling with that cloud made the dell a pit of darkness. on
that shadowy cloud was the lovely rainbow formed, spreading itself on a
horizontal plain, and having a slight and brilliant shade of all the
colours of the heavenly bow, but all of them paler and less defined.
but this terrestrial phenomenon of the early morn cannot be better
delineated than by the name given of it by the shepherd boys, "the
little wee ghost of the rainbow."
such was the description of the morning, and the wild shades of the
hill, that george gave to his father and mr. adam gordon that same day
on which he had witnessed them; and it is necessary that the reader
should comprehend something of their nature to understand what follows.
he seated himself on the pinnacle of the rocky precipice, a little
within the top of the hill to the westward, and, with a light and
buoyant heart, viewed the beauties of the morning, and inhaled its
salubrious breeze. "here," thought he, "i can converse with nature
without disturbance, and without being intruded on by any appalling or
obnoxious visitor." the idea of his brother's dark and malevolent looks
coming at that moment across his mind, he turned his eyes instinctively
to the right, to the point where that unwelcome guest was wont to make
his appearance. gracious heaven! what an apparition was there presented
to his view! he saw, delineated in the cloud, the shoulders, arms, and
features of a human being of the most dreadful aspect. the face was the
face of his brother, but dilated to twenty times the natural size. its
dark eyes gleamed on him through the mist, while every furrow of its
hideous brow frowned deep as the ravines on the brow of the hill.
george started, and his hair stood up in bristles as he gazed on this
horrible monster. he saw every feature and every line of the face
distinctly as it gazed on him with an intensity that was hardly
brookable. its eyes were fixed on him, in the same manner as those of
some carnivorous animal fixed on its prey; and yet there was fear and
trembling in these unearthly features, as plainly depicted as murderous
malice. the giant apparition seemed sometimes to be cowering down as in
terror, so that nothing but his brow and eyes were seen; still these
never turned one moment from their object—again it rose imperceptively
up, and began to approach with great caution; and, as it neared, the
dimensions of its form lessened, still continuing, however, far above
the natural size.
george conceived it to be a spirit. he could conceive it to be nothing
else; and he took it for some horrid demon by which he was haunted,
that had assumed the features of his brother in every lineament, but,
in taking on itself the human form, had miscalculated dreadfully on the
size, and presented itself thus to him in a blown-up, dilated frame of
embodied air, exhaled from the caverns of death or the regions of
devouring fire. he was further confirmed in the belief that it was a
malignant spirit on perceiving that it approached him across the front
of a precipice, where there was not footing for thing of mortal frame.
still, what with terror and astonishment, he continued riveted to the
spot, till it approached, as he deemed, to within two yards of him; and
then, perceiving that it was setting itself to make a violent spring on
him, he started to his feet and fled distractedly in the opposite
direction, keeping his eye cast behind him lest he had been seized in
that dangerous place. but the very first bolt that he made in his
flight he came in contact with a real body of flesh and blood, and that
with such violence that both went down among some scragged rocks, and
george rolled over the other. the being called out "murder"; and,
rising, fled precipitately. george then perceived that it was his
brother; and being confounded between the shadow and the substance, he
knew not what he was doing or what he had done; and, there being only
one natural way of retreat from the brink of the rock, he likewise
arose and pursued the affrighted culprit with all his speed towards the
top of the hill. wringhim was braying out, "murder! murder!" at which
george, being disgusted, and his spirits all in a ferment from some
hurried idea of intended harm, the moment he came up with the craven he
seized him rudely by the shoulder, and clapped his hand on his mouth.
"murder, you beast!" said he; "what do you mean by roaring out murder
in that way? who the devil is murdering you, or offering to murder you?"
wringhim forced his mouth from under his brother's hand, and roared
with redoubled energy: "eh! egh! murder! murder!" etc. george had felt
resolute to put down this shocking alarm, lest someone might hear it
and fly to the spot, or draw inferences widely different from the
truth; and, perceiving the terror of this elect youth to be so great
that expostulation was vain, he seized him by the mouth and nose with
his left hand so strenuously that he sank his fingers into his cheeks.
but, the poltroon still attempting to bray out, george gave him such a
stunning blow with his fist on the left temple that he crumbled, as it
were, to the ground, but more from the effects of terror than those of
the blow. his nose, however, again gushed out blood, a system of
defence which seemed as natural to him as that resorted to by the race
of stinkards. he then raised himself on his knees and hams, and raising
up his ghastly face, while the blood streamed over both ears, he
besought his life of his brother, in the most abject whining manner,
gaping and blubbering most piteously.
"tell me then, sir," said george, resolved to make the most of the
wretch's terror—"tell me for what purpose it is that you haunt my
steps? tell me plainly, and instantly, else i will throw you from the
verge of that precipice."
"oh, i will never do it again! i will never do it again! spare my life,
dear, good brother! spare my life! sure i never did you any hurt."
"swear to me, then, by the god that made you, that you will never
henceforth follow after me to torment me with your hellish threatening
looks; swear that you will never again come into my presence without
being invited. will you take an oath to this effect?"
"oh yes! i will, i will!"
"but this is not all: you must tell me for what purpose you sought me
out here this morning?"
"oh, brother! for nothing but your good. i had nothing at heart but
your unspeakable profit, and great and endless good."
"so, then, you indeed knew that i was here?"
"i was told so by a friend, but i did not believe him; a—a—at least i
did not know that it was true till i saw you."
"tell me this one thing, then, robert, and all shall be forgotten and
forgiven. who was that friend?"
"you do not know him."
"how then does he know me?"
"i cannot tell."
"was he here present with you to-day?"
"yes; he was not far distant. he came to this hill with me."
"where then is he now?"
"i cannot tell."
"then, wretch, confess that the devil was that friend who told you i
was here, and who came here with you. none else could possibly know of
my being here."
"ah! how little you know of him! would you argue that there is neither
man nor spirit endowed with so much foresight as to deduce natural
conclusions from previous actions and incidents but the devil? alas,
brother! but why should i wonder at such abandoned notions and
principles? it was fore-ordained that you should cherish them, and that
they should be the ruin of your soul and body, before the world was
framed. be assured of this, however, that i had no aim of seeking you
but your good!"
"well, robert, i will believe it. i am disposed to be hasty and
passionate: it is a fault in my nature; but i never meant, or wished
you evil; and god is my witness that i would as soon stretch out my
hand to my own life, or my father's, as to yours." at these words,
wringhim uttered a hollow exulting laugh, put his hands in his pockets,
and withdrew a space to his accustomed distance. george continued: "and
now, once for all, i request that we may exchange forgiveness, and that
we may part and remain friends."
"would such a thing be expedient, think you? or consistent with the
glory of god? i doubt it."
"i can think of nothing that would be more so. is it not consistent
with every precept of the gospel? come, brother, say that our
reconciliation is complete."
"oh yes, certainly! i tell you, brother, according to the flesh: it is
just as complete as the lark's is with the adder, no more so, nor ever
can. reconciled, forsooth! to what would i be reconciled?"
as he said this, he strode indignantly away. from the moment that he
heard his life was safe, he assumed his former insolence and revengeful
looks—and never were they more dreadful than on parting with his
brother that morning on the top of the hill. "well, go thy way," said
george; "some would despise, but i pity thee. if thou art not a limb of
satan, i never saw one."
the sun had now dispelled the vapours; and, the morning being lovely
beyond description, george sat himself down on the top of the hill, and
pondered deeply on the unaccountable incident that had befallen to him
that morning. he could in no-wise comprehend it; but, taking it with
other previous circumstances, he could not get quit of a conviction
that he was haunted by some evil genius in the shape of his brother, as
well as by that dark and mysterious wretch himself. in no other way
could he account for the apparition he saw that morning on the face of
the rock, nor for several sudden appearances of the same being, in
places where there was no possibility of any foreknowledge that he
himself was to be there, and as little that the same being, if he were
flesh and blood like other men, could always start up in the same
position with regard to him. he determined, therefore, on reaching
home, to relate all that had happened, from beginning to end, to his
father, asking his counsel and his assistance, although he knew full
well that his father was not the fittest man in the world to solve such
a problem. he was now involved in party politics, over head and ears;
and, moreover, he could never hear the names of either of the wringhims
mentioned without getting into a quandary of disgust and anger; and all
that he would deign to say of them was, to call them by all the
opprobrious names he could invent.
it turned out as the young man from the first suggested: old dalcastle
would listen to nothing concerning them with any patience. george
complained that his brother harassed him with his presence at all
times, and in all places. old dal asked why he did not kick the dog out
of his presence whenever he felt him disagreeable? george said he
seemed to have some demon for a familiar. dal answered that he did not
wonder a bit at that, for the young spark was the third in a direct
line who had all been children of adultery; and it was well known that
all such were born half-deils themselves, and nothing was more likely
than that they should hold intercourse with their fellows. in the same
style did he sympathize with all his son's late sufferings and
perplexities.
in mr. adam gordon, however, george found a friend who entered into all
his feelings, and had seen and known everything about the matter. he
tried to convince him that at all events there could be nothing
supernatural in the circumstances; and that the vision he had seen on
the rock, among the thick mist, was the shadow of his brother
approaching behind him. george could not swallow this, for he had seen
his own shadow on the cloud, and, instead of approaching to aught like
his own figure, he perceived nothing but a halo of glory round a point
of the cloud that was whiter and purer than the rest. gordon said, if
he would go with him to a mountain of his father's, which he named, in
aberdeenshire, he would show him a giant spirit of the same dimensions,
any morning at the rising of the sun, provided he shone on that spot.
this statement excited george's curiosity exceedingly; and, being
disgusted with some things about edinburgh, and glad to get out of the
way, he consented to go with gordon to the highlands for a space. the
day was accordingly set for their departure, the old laird's assent
obtained, and the two young sparks parted in a state of great
impatience for their excursion.
one of them found out another engagement, however, the instant after
this last was determined on. young wringhim went off the hill that
morning, and home to his upright guardian again without washing the
blood from his face and neck; and there he told a most woeful story
indeed: how he had gone out to take a morning's walk on the hill, where
he had encountered with his reprobate brother among the mist, who had
knocked him down and very near murdered him; threatening dreadfully,
and with horrid oaths, to throw him from the top of the cliff.
the wrath of the great divine was kindled beyond measure. he cursed the
aggressor in the name of the most high; and bound himself, by an oath,
to cause that wicked one's transgressions return upon his own head
sevenfold. but, before he engaged further in the business of vengeance,
he kneeled with his adopted son, and committed the whole cause unto the
lord, whom he addressed as one coming breathing burning coals of
juniper, and casting his lightnings before him, to destroy and root out
all who had moved hand or tongue against the children of the promise.
thus did he arise confirmed, and go forth to certain conquest.
we cannot enter into the detail of the events that now occurred without
forestalling a part of the narrative of one who knew all the
circumstances—was deeply interested in them, and whose relation is of
higher value than anything that can be retailed out of the stores of
tradition and old registers; but, his narrative being different from
these, it was judged expedient to give the account as thus publicly
handed down to us. suffice it that, before evening, george was
apprehended, and lodged in jail, on a criminal charge of an assault and
battery, to the shedding of blood, with the intent of committing
fratricide. then was the old laird in great consternation, and blamed
himself for treating the thing so lightly, which seemed to have been
gone about, from the beginning, so systematically, and with an intent
which the villains were now going to realize, namely, to get the young
laird disposed of; and then his brother, in spite of the old
gentleman's teeth, would be laird himself.
old dal now set his whole interest to work among the noblemen and
lawyers of his party. his son's case looked exceedingly ill, owing to
the former assault before witnesses, and the unbecoming expressions
made use of by him on that occasion, as well as from the present
assault, which george did not deny, and for which no moving cause or
motive could be made to appear.
on his first declaration before the sheriff, matters looked no better:
but then the sheriff was a whig. it is well known how differently the
people of the present day, in scotland, view the cases of their own
party-men and those of opposite political principles. but this day is
nothing to that in such matters, although, god knows, they are still
sometimes barefaced enough. it appeared, from all the witnesses in the
first case, that the complainant was the first aggressor—that he
refused to stand out of the way, though apprised of his danger; and,
when his brother came against him inadvertently, he had aimed a blow at
him with his foot, which, if it had taken effect, would have killed
him. but as to the story of the apparition in fair day-light—the
flying from the face of it—the running foul of his brother pursuing
him, and knocking him down, why the judge smiled at the relation, and
saying: "it was a very extraordinary story," he remanded george to
prison, leaving the matter to the high court of justiciary.
when the case came before that court, matters took a different turn.
the constant and sullen attendance of the one brother upon the other
excited suspicions; and these were in some manner confirmed when the
guards at queensberry house deported that the prisoner went by them on
his way to the hill that morning, about twenty minutes before the
complainant, and, when the latter passed, he asked if such a young man
had passed before him, describing the prisoner's appearance to them;
and that, on being answered in the affirmative, he mended his pace and
fell a-running.
the lord justice, on hearing this, asked the prisoner if he had any
suspicions that his brother had a design on his life.
he answered that all along, from the time of their first unfortunate
meeting, his brother had dogged his steps so constantly, and so
unaccountably, that he was convinced it was with some intent out of the
ordinary course of events; and that if, as his lordship supposed, it
was indeed his shadow that he had seen approaching him through the
mist, then, from the cowering and cautious manner that it advanced,
there was no little doubt that his brother's design had been to push
him headlong from the cliff that morning.
a conversation then took place between the judge and the lord advocate;
and, in the meantime, a bustle was seen in the hall; on which the doors
were ordered to be guarded, and, behold, the precious mr. r. wringhim
was taken into custody, trying to make his escape out of court. finally
it turned out that george was honourably acquitted, and young wringhim
bound over to keep the peace, with heavy penalties and securities.
that was a day of high exultation to george and his youthful
associates, all of whom abhorred wringhim; and, the evening being spent
in great glee, it was agreed between mr. adam gordon and george that
their visit to the highlands, though thus long delayed, was not to be
abandoned; and though they had, through the machinations of an
incendiary, lost the season of delight, they would still find plenty of
sport in deer-shooting. accordingly, the day was set a second time for
their departure; and, on the day preceding that, all the party were
invited by george to dine with him once more at the sign of the black
bull of norway. everyone promised to attend, anticipating nothing but
festivity and joy. alas, what short-sighted improvident creatures we
are, all of us; and how often does the evening cup of joy lead to
sorrow in the morning!
the day arrived—the party of young noblemen and gentlemen met, and
were as happy and jovial as men could be. george was never seen so
brilliant, or so full of spirits; and exulting to see so many gallant
young chiefs and gentlemen about him, who all gloried in the same
principles of loyalty (perhaps this word should have been written
disloyalty), he made speeches, gave toasts, and sung songs, all leaning
slyly to the same side, until a very late hour. by that time he had
pushed the bottle so long and so freely that its fumes had taken
possession of every brain to such a degree that they held dame reason
rather at the staff's end, overbearing all her counsels and
expostulations; and it was imprudently proposed by a wild inebriated
spark, and carried by a majority of voices, that the whole party should
adjourn to a bagnio for the remainder of the night.
they did so; and it appears from what follows that the house, to which
they retired must have been somewhere on the opposite side of the
street to the black bull inn, a little farther to the eastward. they
had not been an hour in that house till some altercation chanced to
arise between george colwan and a mr. drummond, the younger son of a
nobleman of distinction. it was perfectly casual, and no one
thenceforward, to this day, could ever tell what it was about, if it
was not about the misunderstanding of some word or term that the one
had uttered. however it was, some high words passed between them; these
were followed by threats, and, in less than two minutes from the
commencement of the quarrel, drummond left the house in apparent
displeasure, hinting to the other that they two should settle that in a
more convenient place.
the company looked at one another, for all was over before any of them
knew such a thing was begun. "what the devil is the matter?" cried one.
"what ails drummond?" cried another. "who has he quarrelled with?"
asked a third.
"don't know."—"can't tell, on my life."—"he has quarrelled with his
wine, i suppose, and is going to send it a challenge."
such were the questions, and such the answers that passed in the jovial
party, and the matter was no more thought of.
but in the course of a very short space, about the length which the
ideas of the company were the next day at great variance, a sharp rap
came to the door. it was opened by a female; but, there being a chain
inside, she only saw one side of the person at the door. he appeared to
be a young gentleman, in appearance like him who had lately left the
house, and asked, in a low whispering voice, "if young dalcastle was
still in the house?" the woman did not know. "if he is," added he,
"pray tell him to speak with me for a few minutes." the woman delivered
the message before all the party, among whom there were then sundry
courteous ladies of notable distinction, and george, on receiving it,
instantly rose from the side of one of them, and said, in the hearing
of them all, "i will bet a hundred merks that is drummond."—"don't go
to quarrel with him, george," said one.—"bring him in with you," said
another. george stepped out; the door was again bolted, the chain drawn
across, and the inadvertent party, left within, thought no more of the
circumstance till the morning, that the report had spread over the city
that a young gentleman had been slain, on a little washing-green at the
side of the north loch, and at the very bottom of the close where this
thoughtless party had been assembled.
several of them, on first hearing the report, basted to the dead-room
in the guard-house, where the corpse had been deposited, and soon
discovered the body to be that of their friend and late entertainer,
george colwan. great were the consternation and grief of all concerned,
and, in particular, of his old father and miss logan; for george had
always been the sole hope and darling of both, and the news of the
event paralysed them so as to render them incapable of all thought or
exertion. the spirit of the old laird was broken by the blow, and he
descended at once from a jolly, good-natured and active man to a mere
driveller, weeping over the body of his son, kissing his wound, his
lips, and his cold brow alternately; denouncing vengeance on his
murderers, and lamenting that he himself had not met the cruel doom, so
that the hope of his race might have been preserved. in short, finding
that all further motive of action and object of concern or of love,
here below, were for ever removed from him, he abandoned himself to
despair, and threatened to go down to the grave with his son.
but, although he made no attempt to discover the murderers, the arm of
justice was not idle; and, it being evident to all that the crime must
infallibly be brought home to young drummond, some of his friends
sought him out, and compelled him, sorely against his will, to retire
into concealment till the issue of the proof that should be led was
made known. at the same time, he denied all knowledge of the incident
with a resolution that astonished his intimate friends and relations,
who to a man suspected him guilty. his father was not in scotland, for
i think it was said to me that this young man was second son to a john,
duke of melfort, who lived abroad with the royal family of the stuarts;
but this young gentleman lived with the relations of his mother, one of
whom, an uncle, was a lord of session: these, having thoroughly
effected his concealment, went away, and listened to the evidence; and
the examination of every new witness convinced them that their noble
young relative was the slayer of his friend.
all the young gentlemen of the party were examined, save drummond, who,
when sent for, could not be found, which circumstance sorely confirmed
the suspicions against him in the minds of judges and jurors, friends
and enemies; and there is little doubt that the care of his relations
in concealing him injured his character and his cause. the young
gentlemen of whom the party was composed varied considerably with
respect to the quarrel between him and the deceased. some of them had
neither heard nor noted it; others had, but not one of them could tell
how it began. some of them had heard the threat uttered by drummond on
leaving the house, and one only had noted him lay his hand on his
sword. not one of them could swear that it was drummond who came to the
door and desired to speak with the deceased, but the general impression
on the minds of them all was to that effect; and one of the women swore
that she heard the voice distinctly at the door, and every word that
voice pronounced, and at the same time heard the deceased say that it
was drummond's.
on the other hand, there were some evidences on drummond's part, which
lord craigie, his uncle, had taken care to collect. he produced the
sword which his nephew had worn that night, on which there was neither
blood nor blemish; and, above all, he insisted on the evidence of a
number of surgeons, who declared that both the wounds which the
deceased had received had been given behind. one of these was below the
left arm, and a slight one; the other was quite through the body, and
both evidently inflicted with the same weapon, a two-edged sword, of
the same dimensions as that worn by drummond.
upon the whole, there was a division in the court, but a majority
decided it. drummond was pronounced guilty of the murder; outlawed for
not appearing, and a high reward offered for his apprehension. it was
with the greatest difficulty that he escaped on board of a small
trading vessel, which landed him in holland, and from thence, flying
into germany, he entered into the service of the emperor charles vi.
many regretted that he was not taken, and made to suffer the penalty
due for such a crime, and the melancholy incident became a pulpit theme
over a great part of scotland, being held up as a proper warning to
youth to beware of such haunts of vice and depravity, the nurses of all
that is precipitate, immoral, and base, among mankind.
after the funeral of this promising and excellent young man, his father
never more held up his head. miss logan, with all her art, could not
get him to attend to any worldly thing, or to make any settlement
whatsoever of his affairs, save making her over a present of what
disposable funds he had about him. as to his estates, when they were
mentioned to him, he wished them all in the bottom of the sea, and
himself along with them. but, whenever she mentioned the circumstance
of thomas drummond having been the murderer of his son, he shook his
head, and once made the remark that "it was all a mistake, a gross and
fatal error; but that god, who had permitted such a flagrant deed,
would bring it to light in his own time and way." in a few weeks he
followed his son to the grave, and the notorious robert wringhim took
possession of his estates as the lawful son of the late laird, born in
wedlock, and under his father's roof. the investiture was celebrated by
prayer, singing of psalms, and religious disputation. the late guardian
and adopted father, and the mother of the new laird, presided on the
grand occasion, making a conspicuous figure in all the work of the day;
and, though the youth himself indulged rather more freely in the bottle
than he had ever been seen to do before, it was agreed by all present
that there had never been a festivity so sanctified within the great
hall of dalcastle. then, after due thanks returned, they parted
rejoicing in spirit; which thanks, by the by, consisted wholly in
telling the almighty what he was; and informing, with very particular
precision, what they were who addressed him; for wringhim's whole
system of popular declamation consisted, it seems, in this—to denounce
all men and women to destruction, and then hold out hopes to his
adherents that they were the chosen few, included in the promises, and
who could never fall away. it would appear that this pharisaical
doctrine is a very delicious one, and the most grateful of all others
to the worst characters.
but the ways of heaven are altogether inscrutable, and soar as far
above and beyond the works and the comprehensions of man as the sun,
flaming in majesty, is above the tiny boy's evening rocket. it is the
controller of nature alone that can bring light out of darkness, and
order out of confusion. who is he that causeth the mole, from his
secret path of darkness, to throw up the gem, the gold, and the
precious ore? the same that from the mouths of babes and sucklings can
extract the perfection of praise, and who can make the most abject of
his creatures instrumental in bringing the most hidden truths to light.
miss logan had never lost the thought of her late master's prediction
that heaven would bring to light the truth concerning the untimely
death of his son. she perceived that some strange conviction, too
horrible for expression, preyed on his mind from the moment that the
fatal news reached him to the last of his existence; and, in his last
ravings, he uttered some incoherent words about justification by faith
alone and absolute and eternal predestination having been the ruin of
his house. these, to be sure, were the words of superannuation, and of
the last and severest kind of it; but, for all that, they sunk deep
into miss logan's soul, and at last she began to think with herself:
"is it possible the wringhims, and the sophisticating wretch who is in
conjunction with them, the mother of my late beautiful and amiable
young master, can have effected his destruction? if so, i will spend my
days, and my little patrimony, in endeavours to rake up and expose the
unnatural deed."
in all her outgoings and incomings mrs. logan (as she was now styled)
never lost sight of this one object. every new disappointment only
whetted her desire to fish up some particulars, concerning it; for she
thought so long and so ardently upon it that by degrees it became
settled in her mind as a sealed truth. and, as woman is always most
jealous of her own sex in such matters, her suspicions were fixed on
her greatest enemy, mrs. colwan, now the lady dowager of dalcastle. all
was wrapt in a chaos of confusion and darkness; but at last, by dint of
a thousand sly and secret inquiries, mrs. logan found out where lady
dalcastle had been on the night that the murder happened, and likewise
what company she had kept, as well as some of the comers and goers; and
she had hopes of having discovered a clue, which, if she could keep
hold of the thread, would lead her through darkness to the light of
truth.
returning very late one evening from a convocation of family servants,
which she had drawn together in order to fish something out of them,
her maid having been in attendance on her all the evening, they found,
on going home, that the house had been broken and a number of valuable
articles stolen therefrom. mrs. logan had grown quite heartless before
this stroke, having been altogether unsuccessful in her inquiries, and
now she began to entertain some resolutions of giving up the fruitless
search.
in a few days thereafter, she received intelligence that her clothes
and plate were mostly recovered, and that she for one was bound over to
prosecute the depredator, provided the articles turned out to be hers,
as libelled in the indictment, and as a king's evidence had given out.
she was likewise summoned, or requested, i know not which, being
ignorant of these matters, to go as far as the town of peebles in
tweedside, in order to survey these articles on such a day, and make
affidavit to their identity before the sheriff. she went accordingly;
but, on entering the town by the north gate, she was accosted by a poor
girl in tattered apparel, who with great earnestness inquired if her
name was not mrs. logan? on being answered in the affirmative, she said
that the unfortunate prisoner in the tolbooth requested her, as she
valued all that was dear to her in life, to go and see her before she
appeared in court at the hour of cause, as she (the prisoner) had
something of the greatest moment to impart to her. mrs. logan's
curiosity was excited, and she followed the girl straight to the
tolbooth, who by the way said to her that she would find in the
prisoner a woman of superior mind, who had gone through all the
vicissitudes of life. "she has been very unfortunate, and i fear very
wicked," added the poor thing, "but she is my mother, and god knows,
with all her faults and failings, she has never been unkind to me. you,
madam, have it in your power to save her; but she has wronged you, and
therefore, if you will not do it for her sake, do it for mine, and the
god of the fatherless will reward you."
mrs. logan answered her with a cast of the head, and a hem! and only
remarked, that "the guilty must not always be suffered to escape, or
what a world must we be doomed to live in!"
she was admitted to the prison, and found a tall emaciated figure, who
appeared to have once possessed a sort of masculine beauty in no
ordinary degree, but was now considerably advanced in years. she viewed
mrs. logan with a stern, steady gaze, as if reading her features as a
margin to her intellect; and when she addressed her it was not with
that humility, and agonized fervour, which are natural for one in such
circumstances to address to another who has the power of her life and
death in her hands.
"i am deeply indebted to you for this timely visit, mrs. logan," said
she. "it is not that i value life, or because i fear death, that i have
sent for you so expressly. but the manner of the death that awaits me
has something peculiarly revolting in it to a female mind. good god!
when i think of being hung up, a spectacle to a gazing, gaping
multitude, with numbers of which i have had intimacies and connections,
that would render the moment of parting so hideous, that, believe me,
it rends to flinders a soul born for another sphere than that in which
it has moved, had not the vile selfishness of a lordly fiend ruined all
my prospects and all my hopes. hear me then; for i do not ask your
pity: i only ask of you to look to yourself, and behave with womanly
prudence; if you deny this day that these goods are yours, there is no
other evidence whatever against my life, and it is safe for the
present. for, as for the word of the wretch who has betrayed me, it is
of no avail; he has prevaricated so notoriously to save himself. if you
deny them, you shall have them all again to the value of a mite, and
more to the bargain. if you swear to the identity of them, the process
will, one way and another, cost you the half of what they are worth."
"and what security have i for that?" said mrs. logan.
"you have none but my word," said the other proudly, "and that never
yet was violated. if you cannot take that, i know the worst you can do.
but i had forgot—i have a poor helpless child without, waiting and
starving about the prison door. surely it was of her that i wished to
speak. this shameful death of mine will leave her in a deplorable
state."
"the girl seems to have candour and strong affections," said mrs.
logan. "i grievously mistake if such a child would not be a thousand
times better without such a guardian and director."
"then will you be so kind as to come to the grass market and see me put
down?" said the prisoner. "i thought a woman would estimate a woman's
and a mother's feelings, when such a dreadful throw was at stake, at
least in part. but you are callous, and have never known any feelings
but those of subordination to your old unnatural master. alas, i have
no cause of offence! i have wronged you; and justice must take its
course. will you forgive me before we part?"
mrs. logan hesitated, for her mind ran on something else. on which the
other subjoined: "no, you will not forgive me, i see. but you will pray
to god to forgive me? i know you will do that."
mrs. logan heard not this jeer, but, looking at the prisoner with an
absent and stupid stare, she said: "did you know my late master?"
"ay, that i did, and never for any good," said she. "i knew the old and
the young spark both, and was by when the latter was slain."
this careless sentence affected mrs. logan in a most peculiar manner. a
shower of tears burst from her eyes ere it was done, and, when it was,
she appeared like one bereaved of her mind. she first turned one way
and then another, as if looking for something she had dropped. she
seemed to think she had lost her eyes, instead of her tears, and at
length, as by instinct, she tottered close up to the prisoner's face,
and, looking wistfully and joyfully in it, said, with breathless
earnestness: "pray, mistress, what is your name?"
"my name is arabella calvert," said the other. "miss, mistress, or
widow, as you choose, for i have been all the three, and that not once
nor twice only. ay, and something beyond all these. but, as for you,
you have never been anything!"
"ay, ay! and so you are bell calvert? well, i thought so—i thought
so," said mrs. logan; and, helping herself to a seat, she came and sat
down close by the prisoner's knee. "so you are indeed bell calvert, so
called once. well, of all the world you are the woman whom i have
longed and travailed the most to see. but you were invisible; a being
to be heard of, not seen."
"there have been days, madam," returned she, "when i was to be seen,
and when there were few to be seen like me. but since that time there
have indeed been days on which i was not to be seen. my crimes have
been great, but my sufferings have been greater. so great that neither
you nor the world can ever either know or conceive them. i hope they
will be taken into account by the most high. mine have been crimes of
utter desperation. but whom am i speaking to? you had better leave me
to myself, mistress."
"leave you to yourself? that i will be loth to do till you tell me
where you were that night my young master was murdered."
"where the devil would, i was! will that suffice you? ah, it was a vile
action! a night to be remembered that was! won't you be going? i want
to trust my daughter with a commission."
"no, mrs. calvert, you and i part not till you have divulged that
mystery to me."
"you must accompany me to the other world, then, for you shall not have
it in this."
"if you refuse to answer me, i can have you before a tribunal, where
you shall be sifted to the soul."
"such miserable inanity! what care i for your threatenings of a
tribunal? i who must soon stand before my last earthly one? what could
the word of such a culprit avail? or, if it could, where is the judge
that could enforce it?"
"did you not say that there was some mode of accommodating matters on
that score?"
"yes, i prayed you to grant me my life, which is in your power. the
saving of it would not have cost you a plack, yet you refused to do it.
the taking of it will cost you a great deal, and yet to that purpose
you adhere. i can have no parley with such a spirit. i would not have
my life in a present from its motions, nor would i exchange courtesies
with its possessor."
"indeed, mrs. calvert, since ever we met, i have been so busy thinking
about who you might be that i know not what you have been proposing. i
believe i meant to do what i could to save you. but, once for all, tell
me everything that you know concerning that amiable young gentleman's
death, and here is my hand there shall be nothing wanting that i can
effect for you."
"no i despise all barter with such mean and selfish curiosity; and, as
i believe that passion is stronger with you, than fear with me, we part
on equal terms. do your worst; and my secret shall go to the gallows
and the grave with me."
mrs. logan was now greatly confounded, and after proffering in vain to
concede everything she could ask in exchange, for the particulars
relating to the murder, she became the suppliant in her turn. but the
unaccountable culprit, exulting in her advantage, laughed her to scorn;
and finally, in a paroxysm of pride and impatience, called in the
jailor and had her expelled, ordering him in her hearing not to grant
her admittance a second time, on any pretence.
mrs. logan was now hard put to it, and again driven almost to despair.
she might have succeeded in the attainment of that she thirsted for
most in life so easily had she known the character with which she had
to deal. had she known to have soothed her high and afflicted spirit:
but that opportunity was past, and the hour of examination at hand. she
once thought of going and claiming her articles, as she at first
intended; but then, when she thought again of the wringhims swaying it
at dalcastle, where she had been wont to hear them held in such
contempt, if not abhorrence, and perhaps of holding it by the most
diabolical means, she was withheld from marring the only chance that
remained of having a glimpse into that mysterious affair.
finally, she resolved not to answer to her name in the court, rather
than to appear and assert a falsehood, which she might be called on to
certify by oath. she did so; and heard the sheriff give orders to the
officers to make inquiry for miss logan from edinburgh, at the various
places of entertainment in town, and to expedite her arrival in court,
as things of great value were in dependence. she also heard the man who
had turned king's evidence against the prisoner examined for the second
time, and sifted most cunningly. his answers gave anything but
satisfaction to the sheriff, though mrs. logan believed them to be
mainly truth. but there were a few questions and answers that struck
her above all others.
"how long is it since mrs. calvert and you became acquainted?"
"about a year and a half."
"state the precise time, if you please; the day, or night, according to
your remembrance."
"it was on the morning of the th of february, ."
"what time of the morning?"
"perhaps about one."
"so early as that? at what place did you meet then?"
"it was at the foot of one of the north wynds of edinburgh."
"was it by appointment that you met?"
"no, it was not."
"for what purpose was it then?"
"for no purpose."
"how is it that you chance to remember the day and hour so minutely, if
you met that woman, whom you have accused, merely by chance, and for no
manner of purpose, as you must have met others that night, perhaps to
the amount of hundreds, in the same way?"
"i have good cause to remember it, my lord."
"what was that cause?—no answer?—you don't choose to say what that
cause was?"
"i am not at liberty to tell."
the sheriff then descended to other particulars, all of which tended to
prove that the fellow was an accomplished villain, and that the
principal share of the atrocities had been committed by him. indeed the
sheriff hinted that he suspected the only share mrs. calvert had in
them was in being too much in his company, and too true to him. the
case was remitted to the court of justiciary; but mrs. logan had heard
enough to convince her that the culprits first met at the very spot,
and the very hour, on which george colwan was slain; and she had no
doubt that they were incendiaries set on by his mother, to forward her
own and her darling son's way to opulence. mrs. logan was wrong, as
will appear in the sequel; but her antipathy to mrs. colwan made her
watch the event with all care. she never quitted peebles as long as
bell calvert remained there, and, when she was removed to edinburgh,
the other followed. when the trial came on, mrs. logan and her maid
were again summoned as witnesses before the jury, and compelled by the
prosecutor for the crown to appear.
the maid was first called; and, when she came into the witness box, the
anxious and hopeless looks of the prisoner were manifest to all. but
the girl, whose name, she said, was bessy gillies, answered in so
flippant and fearless a way that the auditors were much amused. after a
number of routine questions, the depute-advocate asked her if she was
at home on the morning of the fifth of september last, when her
mistress's house was robbed.
"was i at hame, say ye? na, faith-ye, lad! an' i had been at hame,
there had been mair to dee. i wad hae raised sic a yelloch!"
"where were you that morning?"
"where was i, say you? i was in the house where my mistress was,
sitting dozing an' half sleeping in the kitchen. i thought aye she
would be setting out every minute, for twa hours."
"and, when you went home, what did you find?"
"what found we? be my sooth, we found a broken lock, an' toom kists."
"relate some of the particulars, if you please."
"sir, the thieves didna stand upon particulars: they were halesale
dealers in a' our best wares."
"i mean, what passed between your mistress and you on the occasion?"
"what passed, say ye? o, there wasna muckle: i was in a great passion,
but she was dung doitrified a wee. when she gaed to put the key i' the
door, up it flew to the fer wa'. 'bless ye, jaud, what's the meaning o'
this?' quo she. 'ye hae left the door open, ye tawpie!' quo she. 'the
ne'er o' that i did,' quo i, 'or may my shakel bane never turn another
key.' when we got the candle lightit, a' the house was in a hoad-road.
'bessy, my woman,' quo she, 'we are baith ruined and undone creatures.'
'the deil a bit,' quo i; 'that i deny positively.' h'mh! to speak o' a
lass o' my age being ruined and undone! i never had muckle except what
was within a good jerkin, an' let the thief ruin me there wha can."
"do you remember aught else that your mistress said on the occasion?
did you hear her blame any person?"
"o, she made a gread deal o' grumphing an' groaning about the
misfortune, as she ca'd it, an' i think she said it was a part o' the
ruin, wrought by the ringans, or some sic name. 'they'll hae't a'!
they'll hae't a'!' cried she, wringing her hands; 'a'! they'll hae' a',
an' hell wi't, an' they'll get them baith.' 'aweel, that's aye some
satisfaction,' quo i."
"whom did she mean by the ringans, do you know?"
"i fancy they are some creatures that she has dreamed about, for i
think there canna be as ill folks living as she ca's them."
"did you never hear say that the prisoner at the bar there, mrs.
calvert, or bell calvert, was the robber of her house; or that she was
one of the ringans?"
"never. somebody tauld her lately that ane bell calvert robbed her
house, but she disna believe it. neither do i."
"what reasons have you for doubting it?"
"because it was nae woman's fingers that broke up the bolts an' the
locks that were torn open that night."
"very pertinent, bessy. come then within the bar, and look, at these
articles on the table. did you ever see these silver spoons before?"
"i hae seen some very like them, and whaever has seen siller spoons has
done the same."
"can you swear you never saw them before?"
"na, na, i wadna swear to ony siller spoons that ever war made, unless
i had put a private mark on them wi' my ain hand, an' that's what i
never did to ane."
"see, they are all marked with a c."
"sae are a' the spoons in argyle, an' the half o' them in edinburgh i
think. a c is a very common letter, an' so are a' the names that begin
wi't. lay them by, lay them by, an' gie the poor woman her spoons
again. they are marked wi' her ain name, an' i hae little doubt they
are hers, an' that she has seen better days."
"ah, god bless her heart!" sighed the prisoner; and that blessing was
echoed in the breathings of many a feeling breast.
"did you ever see this gown before, think you?"
"i hae seen ane very like it."
"could you not swear that gown was your mistress's once?"
"no, unless i saw her hae't on, an' kend that she had paid for't. i am
very scrupulous about an oath. like is an ill mark. sae ill indeed that
i wad hardly swear to anything."
"but you say that gown is very like one your mistress used to wear."
"i never said sic a thing. it is like one i hae seen her hae out airing
on the hay raip i' the back green. it is very like ane i hae seen mrs.
butler in the grass market wearing too: i rather think it is the same.
bless you, sir, i wadna swear to my ain forefinger, if it had been as
lang out o' my sight an', brought in an' laid on that table."
"perhaps you are not aware, girl, that this scrupulousness of yours is
likely to thwart the purposes of justice, and bereave your mistress of
property to the amount of a thousand merks." (from the judge.)
"i canna help that, my lord: that's her look-out. for my part, i am
resolved to keep a clear conscience, till i be married, at any rate."
"look over these things and see if there is any one article among them
which you can fix on as the property of your mistress."
"no ane o' them, sir, no ane o' them. an oath is an awfu' thing,
especially when it is for life or death. gie the poor woman her things
again, an' let my mistress pick up the next she finds: that's my
advice."
when mrs. logan came into the box, the prisoner groaned and laid down
her head. but how she was astonished when she heard her deliver herself
something to the following purport—that, whatever penalties she was
doomed to abide, she was determined she would not bear witness against
a woman's life, from a certain conviction that it could not be a woman
who broke her house. "i have no doubt that i may find some of my own
things there," added she, "but, if they were found in her possession,
she has been made a tool, or the dupe, of an infernal set, who shall be
nameless here. i believe she did not rob me, and for that reason i will
have no hand in her condemnation."
the judge: "this is the most singular perversion i have ever witnessed.
mrs. logan, i entertain strong suspicions that the prisoner, or her
agents, have made some agreement with you on this matter to prevent the
course of justice."
"so far from that, my lord, i went into the jail at peebles to this
woman, whom i had never seen before, and proffered to withdraw my part
in the prosecution, as well as my evidence, provided she would tell me
a few simple facts; but she spurned at my offer, and had me turned
insolently out of the prison, with orders to the jailor never to admit
me again on any pretence."
the prisoner's counsel, taking hold of this evidence, addressed the
jury with great fluency; and, finally, the prosecution was withdrawn,
and the prisoner dismissed from the bar, with a severe reprimand for
her past conduct, and an exhortation to keep better company.
it was not many days till a caddy came with a large parcel to mrs.
logan's house, which parcel he delivered into her hands, accompanied
with a sealed note, containing an inventory of the articles, and a
request to know if the unfortunate arabella calvert would be admitted
to converse with mrs. logan.
never was there a woman so much overjoyed as mrs. logan was at this
message. she returned compliments. would be most happy to see her; and
no article of the parcel should be looked at, or touched, till her
arrival. it was not long till she made her appearance, dressed in
somewhat better style than she had yet seen her; delivered her over the
greater part of the stolen property, besides many things that either
never had belonged to mrs. logan or that she thought proper to deny in
order that the other might retain them.
the tale that she told of her misfortunes was of the most distressing
nature, and was enough to stir up all the tender, as well as abhorrent
feelings in the bosom of humanity. she had suffered every deprivation
in fame, fortune, and person. she had been imprisoned; she had been
scourged, and branded as an impostor; and all on account of her
resolute and unmoving fidelity and truth to several of the very worst
of men, every one of whom had abandoned her to utter destitution and
shame. but this story we cannot enter on at present, as it would
perhaps mar the thread of our story, as much as it did the anxious
anticipations of mrs. logan, who sat pining and longing for the
relation that follows.
"now i know, mrs. logan, that you are expecting a detail of the
circumstances relating to the death of mr. george colwan; and, in
gratitude for your unbounded generosity and disinterestedness, i will
tell you all that i know, although, for causes that will appear obvious
to you, i had determined never in life to divulge one circumstance of
it. i can tell you, however, that you will be disappointed, for it was
not the gentleman who was accused, found guilty, and would have
suffered the utmost penalty of the law had he not made his escape. it
was not he, i say, who slew your young master, nor had he any hand in
it."
"i never thought he had. but, pray, how do you come to know this?"
"you shall hear. i had been abandoned in york by an artful and
consummate fiend; and found guilty of being art and part concerned in
the most heinous atrocities, and, in his place, suffered what i yet
shudder to think of i was banished the county, begged my way with my
poor outcast child up to edinburgh, and was there obliged, for the
second time in my life, to betake myself to the most degrading of all
means to support two wretched lives. i hired a dress, and betook me,
shivering, to the high street, too well aware that my form and
appearance would soon draw me suitors enow at that throng and
intemperate time of the parliament. on my very first stepping out to
the street, a party of young gentlemen was passing. i heard by the
noise they made, and the tenor of their speech, that they were more
then mellow, and so i resolved to keep near them, in order, if
possible, to make some of them my prey. but, just as one of them began
to eye me, i was rudely thrust into a narrow close by one of the
guardsmen. i had heard to what house the party was bound, for the men
were talking exceedingly loud, and making no secret of it: so i hasted
down the close, and round below to the one where their rendezvous was
to be; but i was too late, they were all housed and the door bolted. i
resolved to wait, thinking they could not all stay long; but i was
perishing with famine, and was like to fall down. the moon shone as
bright as day, and i perceived, by a sign at the bottom of the close,
that there was a small tavern of a certain description up two stairs
there. i went up and called, telling the mistress of the house my plan.
she approved of it mainly, and offered me her best apartment, provided
i could get one of these noble mates to accompany me. she abused lucky
sudds, as she called her, at the inn where the party was, envying her
huge profits, no doubt, and giving me afterwards something to drink for
which i really felt exceedingly grateful in my need. i stepped
downstairs in order to be on the alert. the moment that i reached the
ground, the door of lucky sudds' house opened and shut, and down came
the honourable thomas drummond, with hasty and impassioned strides, his
sword rattling at his heel. i accosted him in a soft and soothing tone.
he was taken with my address; for he instantly stood still and gazed
intently at me, then at the place, and then at me again. i beckoned him
to follow me, which he did without further ceremony, and we soon found
ourselves together in the best room of a house where everything was
wretched. he still looked about him, and at me; but all this while he
had never spoken a word. at length, i asked if he would take any
refreshment? 'if you please,' said he. i asked what he would have, but
he only answered, 'whatever you choose, madam.' if he was taken with my
address, i was much more taken with his; for he was a complete
gentleman, and a gentleman will ever act as one. at length, he began as
follows:
"'i am utterly at a loss to account for this adventure, madam. it seems
to me like enchantment, and i can hardly believe my senses. an english
lady, i judge, and one, who from her manner and address should belong
to the first class of society, in such a place as this, is indeed
matter of wonder to me. at the foot of a close in edinburgh! and at
this time of the night! surely it must have been no common reverse of
fortune that reduced you to this?' i wept, or pretended to do so; on
which he added, 'pray, madam, take heart. tell me what has befallen
you; and if i can do anything for you, in restoring you to your country
or your friends, you shall command my interest.'
"i had great need of a friend then, and i thought now was the time to
secure one. so i began and told him the moving tale i have told you.
but i soon perceived that i had kept by the naked truth too
unvarnishedly, and thereby quite overshot my mark. when he learned that
he was sitting in a wretched corner of an irregular house, with a
felon, who had so lately been scourged and banished as a swindler and
impostor, his modest nature took the alarm, and he was shocked, instead
of being moved with pity. his eye fixed on some of the casual stripes
on my arm, and from that moment he became restless and impatient to be
gone. i tried some gentle arts to retain him, but in vain; so, after
paying both the landlady and me for pleasures he had neither tasted nor
asked, he took his leave.
"i showed him downstairs; and, just as he turned the corner of the next
land, a man came rushing violently by him; exchanged looks with him,
and came running up to me. he appeared in great agitation, and was
quite out of breath; and, taking my hand in his, we ran upstairs
together without speaking, and were instantly in the apartment i had
left, where a stoup of wine still stood untasted. 'ah, this is
fortunate!' said my new spark, and helped himself. in the meanwhile, as
our apartment was a corner one, and looked both east and north, i ran
to the eastern casement to look after drummond. now, note me well: i
saw him going eastward in his tartans and bonnet, and the gilded hilt
of his claymore glittering in the moon; and, at the very same time, i
saw two men, the one in black, and the other likewise in tartans,
coming towards the steps from the opposite bank, by the foot of the
loch; and i saw drummond and they eyeing each other as they passed. i
kept view of him till he vanished towards leith wynd, and by that time
the two strangers had come close up under our window. this is what i
wish you to pay particular attention to. i had only lost sight of
drummond (who had given me his name and address) for the short space of
time that we took in running up one pair of short stairs; and during
that space he had halted a moment, for, when i got my eye on him again,
he had not crossed the mouth of the next entry, nor proceeded above ten
or twelve paces, and, at the same time, i saw the two men coming down
the bank on the opposite side of the loch, at about three hundred
paces' distance. both he and they were distinctly in my view, and never
within speech of each other, until he vanished into one of the wynds
leading towards the bottom of the high street, at which precise time
the two strangers came below my window; so that it was quite clear he
neither could be one of them nor have any communication with them.
"yet, mark me again; for, of all things i have ever seen, this was the
most singular. when i looked down at the two strangers, one of them was
extremely like drummond. so like was he that there was not one item in
dress, form, feature, nor voice, by which i could distinguish the one
from the other. i was certain it was not he, because i had seen the one
going and the other approaching at the same time, and my impression at
the moment was that i looked upon some spirit, or demon, in his
likeness. i felt a chillness creep all round my heart, my knees
tottered, and, withdrawing my head from the open casement that lay in
the dark shade, i said to the man who was with me, 'good god, what is
this?'
"'what is it, my dear?' said he, as much alarmed as i was.
"'as i live, there stands an apparition!' said i.
"he was not so much afraid when he heard me say so, and, peeping
cautiously out, he looked and listened awhile, and then, drawing back,
he said in a whisper, 'they are both living men, and one of them is he
i passed at the corner.'
"'that he is not,' said i, emphatically. 'to that i will make oath.'
"he smiled and shook his head, and then added, 'i never then saw a man
before, whom i could not know again, particularly if he was the very
last i had seen. but what matters it whether it be or not? as it is no
concern of ours, let us sit down and enjoy ourselves.'
'but it does matter a very great deal with me, sir,' said i. 'bless me,
my head is giddy—my breath quite gone, and i feel as if i were
surrounded with fiends. who are you, sir?'
'you shall know that ere we two part, my love,' said he. 'i cannot
conceive why the return of this young gentleman to the spot he so
lately left should discompose you. i suppose he got a glance of you as
he passed, and has returned to look after you, and that is the whole
secret of the matter.'
"'if you will be so civil as to walk out and join him then, it will
oblige me hugely,' said i, 'for i never in my life experienced such
boding apprehensions of evil company. i cannot conceive how you should
come up here without asking my permission. will it please you to be
gone, sir?' i was within an ace of prevailing. he took out his purse—i
need not say more—i was bribed to let him remain. ah, had i kept my
frail resolution of dismissing him at that moment, what a world of
shame and misery had been evited! but that, though uppermost still in
my mind, has nothing ado here.
"when i peeped over again, the two men were disputing in a whisper, the
one of them in violent agitation and terror, and the other upbraiding
him, and urging him on to some desperate act. at length i heard the
young man in the highland garb say indignantly, 'hush, recreant! it is
god's work which you are commissioned to execute, and it must be done.
but, if you positively decline it, i will do it myself, and do you
beware of the consequences.'
"'oh, i will, i will!' cried the other in black clothes, in a wretched
beseeching tone. 'you shall instruct me in this, as in all things else.'
"i thought all this while i was closely concealed from them, and
wondered not a little when he in tartans gave me a sly nod, as much as
to say, 'what do you think of this?' or, 'take note of what you see,'
or something to that effect; from which i perceived that, whatever he
was about, he did not wish it to be kept a secret. for all that, i was
impressed with a terror and anxiety that i could not overcome, but it
only made me mark every event with the more intense curiosity. the
highlander, whom i still could not help regarding as the evil genius of
thomas drummond, performed every action as with the quickness of
thought. he concealed the youth in black in a narrow entry, a little to
the westward of my windows, and, as he was leading him across the
moonlight green by the shoulder, i perceived, for the first time, that
both of them were armed with rapiers. he pushed him without resistance
into the dark shaded close, made another signal to me, and hasted up
the close to lucky sudds' door. the city and the morning were so still
that i heard every word that was uttered, on putting my head out a
little. he knocked at the door sharply, and, after waiting a
considerable space, the bolt was drawn, and the door, as i conceived,
edged up as far as the massy chain would let it. 'is young dalcastle
still in the house?' said he sharply.
"i did not hear the answer, but i heard him say, shortly after, 'if he
is, pray tell him to speak with me for a few minutes.' he then withdrew
from the door, and came slowly down the close, in a lingering manner,
looking oft behind him. dalcastle came out; advanced a few steps after
him, and then stood still, as if hesitating whether or not he should
call out a friend to accompany him; and that instant the door behind
him was closed, chained, and the iron bolt drawn; on hearing of which,
he followed his adversary without further hesitation. as he passed
below my window, i heard him say, 'i beseech you, tom, let us do
nothing in this matter rashly'; but i could not hear the answer of the
other, who had turned the corner.
"i roused up my drowsy companion, who was leaning on the bed, and we
both looked together from the north window. we were in the shade, but
the moon shone full on the two young gentlemen. young dalcastle was
visibly the worse of liquor, and, his back being turned towards us, he
said something to the other which i could not make out, although he
spoke a considerable time, and, from his tones and gestures, appeared
to be reasoning.
"when he had done, the tall young man in the tartans drew his sword,
and, his face being straight to us, we heard him say distinctly, 'no
more words about it, george, if you please; but if you be a man, as i
take you to be, draw your sword, and let us settle it here.'
"dalcastle drew his sword, without changing his attitude; but he spoke
with more warmth, for we heard his words, 'think you that i fear you,
tom? be assured, sir, i would not fear ten of the best of your name, at
each other's backs: all that i want is to have friends with us to see
fair play, for, if you close with me, you are a dead man.'
"the other stormed at these words. 'you are a braggart, sir,' cried he,
'a wretch—a blot on the cheek of nature—a blight on the christian
world—a reprobate—i'll have your soul, sir. you must play at tennis,
and put down elect brethren in another world to-morrow.' as he said
this, he brandished his rapier, exciting dalcastle to offence. he
gained his point. the latter, who had previously drawn, advanced upon
his vapouring and licentious antagonist, and a fierce combat ensued. my
companion was delighted beyond measure, and i could not keep him from
exclaiming, loud enough to have been heard, 'that's grand! that's
excellent!' for me, my heart quaked like an aspen. young dalcastle
either had a decided advantage over his adversary, or else the other
thought proper to let him have it; for he shifted, and swore, and
flitted from dalcastle's thrusts like a shadow, uttering ofttimes a
sarcastic laugh, that seemed to provoke the other beyond all bearing.
at one time, he would spring away to a great distance, then advance
again on young dalcastle with the swiftness of lightning. but that
young hero always stood his ground, and repelled the attack: he never
gave way, although they fought nearly twice round the bleaching green,
which you know is not a very small one. at length they fought close up
to the mouth of the dark entry, where the fellow in black stood all
this while concealed, and then the combatant in tartans closed with his
antagonist, or pretended to do so; but, the moment they began to
grapple, he wheeled about, turning colwan's back towards the entry, and
then cried out, 'ah, hell has it! my friend, my friend!'
"that moment the fellow in black rushed from his cover with his drawn
rapier, and gave the brave young dalcastle two deadly wounds in the
back, as quick as arm could thrust, both of which i thought pierced
through his body. he fell, and, rolling himself on his back, he
perceived who it was that had slain him thus foully, and said, with a
dying emphasis, which i never heard equalled, 'oh, dog of hell, it is
you who has done this!'
"he articulated some more, which i could not hear for other sounds;
for, the moment that the man in black inflicted the deadly wound, my
companion called out, 'that's unfair, you rip! that's damnable! to
strike a brave fellow behind! one at a time, you cowards!' etc., to all
which the unnatural fiend in the tartans answered with a loud exulting
laugh; and then, taking the poor paralysed murderer by the bow of the
arm, he hurried him in the dark entry once more, where i lost sight of
them for ever."
before this time mrs. logan had risen up; and, when the narrator had
finished, she was standing with her arms stretched upwards at their
full length, and her visage turned down, on which were portrayed the
lines of the most absolute horror. "the dark suspicions of my late
benefactor have been just, and his last prediction is fulfilled," cried
she. "the murderer of the accomplished george colwan has been his own
brother, set on, there is little doubt, by her who bare them both, and
her directing angel, the self-justified bigot. aye, and yonder they
sit, enjoying the luxuries so dearly purchased, with perfect impunity!
if the almighty do not hurl them down, blasted with shame and
confusion, there is no hope of retribution in this life. and, by his
might, i will be the agent to accomplish it! why did the man not pursue
the foul murderers? why did he not raise the alarm, and call the watch?"
"he? the wretch! he durst not move from the shelter he had obtained.
no, not for the soul of him. he was pursued for his life, at the moment
when he first flew into my arms. but i did not know it; no, i did not
then know him. may the curse of heaven, and the blight of hell, settle
on the detestable wretch! he pursue for the sake of justice! no; his
efforts have all been for evil, but never for good. but i raised the
alarm; miserable and degraded as i was, i pursued and raised the watch
myself. have you not heard the name of bell calvert coupled with that
hideous and mysterious affair?"
"yes, i have. in secret often i have heard it. but how came it that you
could never be found? how came it that you never appeared in defence of
the honourable thomas drummond; you, the only person who could have
justified him?"
"i could not, for i then fell under the power and guidance of a wretch
who durst not for the soul of him be brought forward in the affair.
and, what was worse, his evidence would have overborne mine, for he
would have sworn that the man who called out and fought colwan was the
same he met leaving my apartment, and there was an end of it. and,
moreover, it is well known that this same man—this wretch of whom i
speak, never mistook one man for another in his life, which makes the
mystery of the likeness between this incendiary and drummond the more
extraordinary."
"if it was drummond, after all that you have asserted, then are my
surmises still wrong."
"there is nothing of which i can be more certain than that it was not
drummond. we have nothing on earth but our senses to depend upon. if
these deceive us, what are we to do? i own i cannot account for it; nor
ever shall be able to account for it as long as i live."
"could you know the man in black, if you saw him again?"
"i think i could, if i saw him walk or run: his gait was very
particular. he walked as if he had been flat-soled, and his legs made
of steel, without any joints in his feet or ankles."
"the very same! the very same! the very same! pray will you take a few
days' journey into the country with me, to look at such a man?"
"you have preserved my life, and for you i will do anything. i will
accompany you with pleasure: and i think i can say that i will know
him, for his form left an impression on my heart not soon to be
effaced. but of this i am sure, that my unworthy companion will
recognize him, and that he will be able to swear to his identity every
day as long as he lives."
"where is he? where is he? oh! mrs. calvert, where is he?"
"where is he? he is the wretch whom you heard giving me up to the
death; who, after experiencing every mark of affection that a poor
ruined being could confer, and after committing a thousand atrocities
of which she was ignorant, became an informer to save his diabolical
life, and attempted to offer up mine as a sacrifice for all. we will go
by ourselves first, and i will tell you if it is necessary to send any
farther."
the two dames, the very next morning, dressed themselves like country
goodwives, and, hiring two stout ponies furnished with pillions, they
took their journey westward, and the second evening after leaving
edinburgh they arrived at the village about two miles below dalcastle,
where they alighted. but mrs. logan, being anxious to have mrs.
calvert's judgment, without either hint or preparation, took care not
to mention that they were so near to the end of their journey. in
conformity with this plan, she said, after they had sat a while:
"heigh-ho, but i am weary! what, suppose we should rest a day here
before we proceed farther on our journey?"
mrs. calvert was leaning on the casement and looking out when her
companion addressed these words to her, and by far too much engaged to
return any answer, for her eyes were riveted on two young men who
approached from the farther end of the village; and at length, turning
round her head, she said, with the most intense interest, "proceed
farther on our journey, did you say? that we need not do; for, as i
live, here comes the very man!"
mrs. logan ran to the window, and, behold, there was indeed robert
wringhim colwan (now the laird of dalcastle) coming forward almost
below their window, walking arm in arm with another young man; and, as
the two passed, the latter looked up and made a sly signal to the two
dames, biting his lip, winking with his left eye, and nodding his head.
mrs. calvert was astonished at this recognizance, the young man's
former companion having made exactly such another signal on the night
of the duel, by the light of the moon; and it struck her, moreover,
that she had somewhere seen this young man's face before. she looked
after him, and he winked over his shoulder to her; but she was
prevented from returning his salute by her companion, who uttered a
loud cry, between a groan and shriek, and fell down on the floor with a
rumble like a wall that had suddenly been undermined. she had fainted
quite away, and required all her companion's attention during the
remainder of the evening, for she had scarcely ever well recovered out
of one fit before she fell into another, and in the short intervals she
raved like one distracted or in a dream. after falling into a sound
sleep by night, she recovered her equanimity, and the two began to
converse seriously on what they had seen. mrs. calvert averred that the
young man who passed next to the window was the very man who stabbed
george colwan in the back, and she said she was willing to take her
oath on it at any time when required, and was certain, if the wretch
ridsley saw him, that he would make oath to the same purport, for that
his walk was so peculiar no one of common discernment could mistake it.
mrs. logan was in great agitation, and said: "it is what i have
suspected all along, and what i am sure my late master and benefactor
was persuaded of, and the horror of such an idea cut short his days.
that wretch, mrs. calvert, is the born brother of him he murdered, sons
of the same mother they were, whether or not of the same father, the
lord only knows. but, oh, mrs. calvert, that is not the main thing that
has discomposed me, and shaken my nerves to pieces at this time. who do
you think the young man was who walked in his company to-night?"
"i cannot for my life recollect, but am convinced i have seen the same
fine form and face before."
"and did not he seem to know us, mrs. calvert? you who are able to
recollect things as they happened, did he not seem to recollect us, and
make signs to that effect?"
"he did, indeed, and apparently with great good humour."
"oh, mrs calvert, hold me, else i shall fall into hysterics again! who
is he? who is he? tell me who you suppose he is, for i cannot say my
own thought."
"on my life, i cannot remember."
"did you note the appearance of the young gentleman you saw slain that
night? do you recollect aught of the appearance of my young master,
george colwan?"
mrs. calvert sat silent, and stared the other mildly in the face. their
looks encountered, and there was an unearthly amazement that gleamed
from each, which, meeting together, caught real fire, and returned the
flame to their heated imaginations, till the two associates became like
two statues, with their hands spread, their eyes fixed, and their chops
fallen down upon their bosoms. an old woman who kept the lodging-house,
having been called in before when mrs. logan was faintish, chanced to
enter at this crisis with some cordial; and, seeing the state of her
lodgers, she caught the infection, and fell into the same rigid and
statue-like appearance. no scene more striking was ever exhibited; and
if mrs. calvert had not resumed strength of mind to speak, and break
the spell, it is impossible to say how long it might have continued.
"it is he, i believe," said she, uttering the words as it were
inwardly. "it can be none other but he. but, no, it is impossible! i
saw him stabbed through and through the heart; i saw him roll backward
on the green in his own blood, utter his last words, and groan away his
soul. yet, if it is not he, who can it be?"
"it is he!" cried mrs. logan, hysterically.
"yes, yes, it is he!" cried the landlady, in unison.
"it is who?" said mrs. calvert. "whom do you mean, mistress?"
"oh, i don't know! i don't know! i was affrighted."
"hold your peace then till you recover your senses, and tell me, if you
can, who that young gentleman is who keeps company with the new laird
of dalcastle?"
"oh, it is he! it is he!" screamed mrs. logan, wringing her hands.
"oh, it is he! it is he!" cried the landlady, wringing hers.
mrs. calvert turned the latter gently and civilly out of the apartment,
observing that there seemed to be some infection in the air of the
room, and she would be wise for herself to keep out of it.
the two dames had a restless and hideous night. sleep came not to their
relief, for their conversation was wholly about the dead, who seemed to
be alive, and their minds were wandering and groping in a chaos of
mystery. "did you attend to his corpse, and know that he positively
died and was buried?" said mrs. calvert.
"oh, yes, from the moment that his fair but mangled corpse was brought
home, i attended it till that when it was screwed in the coffin. i
washed the long stripes of blood from his lifeless form, on both sides
of the body. i bathed the livid wound that passed through his generous
and gentle heart. there was one through the flesh of his left side too,
which had bled most outwardly of them all. i bathed them, and bandaged
them up with wax and perfumed ointment, but still the blood oozed
through all, so that when he was laid in the coffin he was like one
newly murdered. my brave, my generous young master. he was always as a
son to me, and no son was ever more kind or more respectful to a
mother. but he was butchered—he was cut off from the earth ere he had
well reached to manhood—most barbarously and unfairly slain. and how
is it, how can it be, that we again see him here, walking arm in arm
with his murderer?"
"the thing cannot be, mrs. logan. it is a phantasy of our disturbed
imaginations, therefore let us compose ourselves till we investigate
this matter farther."
"it cannot be in nature, that is quite clear," said mrs. logan. "yet
how it should be that i should think so—i who knew and nursed him from
his infancy—there lies the paradox. as you said once before, we have
nothing but our senses to depend on, and, if you and i believe that we
see a person, why, we do see him. whose word, or whose reasoning can
convince us against our own senses? we will disguise ourselves as poor
women selling a few country wares, and we will go up to the hall, and
see what is to see, and hear what we can hear, for this is a weighty
business in which we are engaged, namely, to turn the vengeance of the
law upon an unnatural monster; and we will further learn, if we can,
who this is that accompanies him."
mrs. calvert acquiesced, and the two dames took their way to dalcastle,
with baskets well furnished with trifles. they did not take the common
path from the village, but went about, and approached the mansion by a
different way. but it seemed as if some overruling power ordered it
that they should miss no chance of attaining the information they
wanted. for ere ever they came within half a mile of dalcastle they
perceived the two youths coming as to meet them, on the same path. the
road leading from dalcastle towards the north-east, as all the country
knows, goes along a dark bank of brush-wood called the bogle-heuch. it
was by this track that the two women were going, and, when they
perceived the two gentlemen meeting them, they turned back, and, the
moment they were out of their sight, they concealed themselves in a
thicket close by the road. they did this because mrs. logan was
terrified for being discovered, and because they wished to reconnoitre
without being seen. mrs. calvert now charged her, whatever she saw, or
whatever she heard, to put on a resolution, and support it, for if she
fainted there and was discovered, what was to become of her!
the two young men came on, in earnest and vehement conversation; but
the subject they were on was a terrible one, and hardly fit to be
repeated in the face of a christian community. wringhim was disputing
the boundlessness of the true christian's freedom, and expressing
doubts that, chosen as he knew he was from all eternity, still it might
be possible for him to commit acts that would exclude him from the
limits of the covenant. the other argued, with mighty fluency, that the
thing was utterly impossible, and altogether inconsistent with eternal
predestination. the arguments of the latter prevailed, and the laird
was driven to sullen silence. but, to the women's utter surprise, as
the conquering disputant passed, he made a signal of recognizance
through the brambles to them, as formerly, and, that he might expose
his associate fully, and in his true colours, he led him backwards
and forwards by the women more than twenty times, making him to confess
both the crimes that he had done and those he had in contemplation. at
length he said to him: "assuredly i saw some strolling vagrant women on
this walk, my dear friend: i wish we could find them, for there is
little doubt that they are concealed here in your woods."
"i wish we could find them," answered wringhim. "we would have fine
sport maltreating and abusing them."
"that we should, that we should! now tell me, robert, if you found a
malevolent woman, the latent enemy of your prosperity, lurking in these
woods to betray you, what would you inflict on her?"
"i would tear her to pieces with my dogs, and feed them with her flesh.
oh, my dear friend, there is an old strumpet who lived with my
unnatural father, whom i hold in such utter detestation that i stand
constantly in dread of her, and would sacrifice the half of my estate
to shed her blood!"
"what will you give me if i will put her in your power, and give you a
fair and genuine excuse for making away with her; one for which you
shall answer at the bar, here or hereafter?"
"i should like to see the vile hag put down. she is in possession of
the family plate, that is mine by right, as well as a thousand valuable
relics, and great riches besides, all of which the old profligate
gifted shamefully away. and it is said, besides all these, that she has
sworn my destruction."
"she has, she has. but i see not how she can accomplish that, seeing
the deed was done so suddenly, and in the silence of the night."
"it was said there were some onlookers. but where shall we find that
disgraceful miss logan?"
"i will show you her by and by. but will you then consent to the other
meritorious deed? come, be a man, and throw away scruples."
"if you can convince me that the promise is binding i will."
"then step this way, till i give you a piece of information."
they walked a little way out of hearing, but went not out of sight;
therefore, though the women were in a terrible quandary, they durst not
stir, for they had some hopes that this extraordinary person was on a
mission of the same sort with themselves, knew of them, and was going
to make use of their testimony. mrs. logan was several times on the
point of falling into a swoon, so much did the appearance of the young
man impress her, until her associate covered her face that she might
listen without embarrassment. but this latter dialogue roused different
feelings within them; namely, those arising from imminent personal
danger. they saw his waggish associate point out the place of their
concealment to wringhim, who came towards them, out of curiosity to see
what his friend meant by what he believed to be a joke, manifestly
without crediting it in the least degree. when he came running away,
the other called after him: "if she is too hard for you, call to me."
as he said this, he hasted out of sight, in the contrary direction,
apparently much delighted with the joke.
wringhim came rushing through the thicket impetuously, to the very spot
where mrs. logan lay squatted. she held the wrapping close about her
head, but he tore it off and discovered her. "the curse of god be on
thee!" said he. "what fiend has brought thee here, and for what purpose
art thou come? but, whatever has brought thee, i have thee!" and with
that he seized her by the throat. the two women, when they heard what
jeopardy they were in from such a wretch, had squatted among the
underwood at a small distance from each other, so that he had never
observed mrs. calvert; but, no sooner had he seized her benefactor,
than, like a wild cat, she sprung out of the thicket, and had both
hands fixed at his throat, one of them twisted in his stock, in a
twinkling. she brought him back-over among the brushwood, and the two,
fixing on him like two harpies, mastered him with case. then indeed was
he woefully beset. he deemed for a while that his friend was at his
back, and, turning his bloodshot eyes towards the path, he attempted to
call; but there was no friend there, and the women cut short his cries
by another twist of his stock. "now, gallant and rightful laird of
dalcastle," said mrs. logan, "what hast thou to say for thyself? lay
thy account to dree the weird thou hast so well earned. now shalt thou
suffer due penance for murdering thy brave and only brother."
"thou liest, thou hag of the pit! i touched not my brother's life."
"i saw thee do it with these eyes that now look thee in the face; ay,
when his back was to thee, too, and while he was hotly engaged with thy
friend," said mrs. calvert.
"i heard thee confess it again and again this same hour," said mrs.
logan.
"ay, and so did i," said her companion. "murder will out, though the
almighty should lend hearing to the ears of the willow, and speech to
the seven tongues of the woodriff."
"you are liars and witches!" said he, foaming with rage, "and creatures
fitted from the beginning for eternal destruction. i'll have your bones
and your blood sacrificed on your cursed altars! o gil-martin!
gil-martin! where art thou now? here, here is the proper food for
blessed vengeance! hilloa!"
there was no friend, no gil-martin there to hear or assist him: he was
in the two women's mercy, but they used it with moderation. they
mocked, they tormented, and they threatened him; but, finally, after
putting him in great terror, they bound his hands behind his back, and
his feet fast with long straps of garters which they chanced to have in
their baskets, to prevent him from pursuing them till they were out of
his reach. as they left him, which they did in the middle of the path,
mrs. calvert said: "we could easily put an end to thy sinful life, but
our hands shall be free of thy blood. nevertheless thou art still in
our power, and the vengeance of thy country shall overtake thee, thou
mean and cowardly murderer, ay, and that more suddenly than thou art
aware!"
the women posted to edinburgh; and as they put themselves under the
protection of an english merchant, who was journeying thither with
twenty horses laden, and armed servants, so they had scarcely any
conversation on the road. when they arrived at mrs. logan's house, then
they spoke of what they had seen and heard, and agreed that they had
sufficient proof to condemn young wringhim, who they thought richly
deserved the severest doom of the law.
"i never in my life saw any human being," said mrs. calvert, "whom i
thought so like a fiend. if a demon could inherit flesh and blood, that
youth is precisely such a being as i could conceive that demon to be.
the depth and the malignity of his eye is hideous. his breath is like
the airs from a charnel house, and his flesh seems fading from his
bones, as if the worm that never dies were gnawing it away already."
"he was always repulsive, and every way repulsive," said the other,
"but he is now indeed altered greatly to the worse. while we were
hand-fasting him, i felt his body to be feeble and emaciated; but yet i
know him to be so puffed up with spiritual pride that i believe he
weens every one of his actions justified before god, and, instead of
having stings of conscience for these, he takes great merit to himself
in having effected them. still my thoughts are less about him than the
extraordinary being who accompanies him. he does everything with so
much ease and indifference, so much velocity and effect, that all
bespeak him an adept in wickedness. the likeness to my late hapless
young master is so striking that i can hardly believe it to be a chance
model; and i think he imitates him in everything, for some purpose or
some effect on his sinful associate. do you know that he is so like in
every lineament, look, and gesture, that, against the clearest light of
reason, i cannot in my mind separate the one from the other, and have a
certain indefinable expression on my mind that they are one and the
same being, or that the one was a prototype of the other."
"if there is an earthly crime," said mrs. calvert, "for the due
punishment of which the almighty may be supposed to subvert the order
of nature, it is fratricide. but tell me, dear friend, did you remark
to what the subtile and hellish villain was endeavouring to prompt the
assassin?"
"no, i could not comprehend it. my senses were altogether so bewildered
that i thought they had combined to deceive me, and i gave them no
credit."
"then bear me: i am almost certain he was using every persuasion to
induce him to make away with his mother; and i likewise conceive that i
heard the incendiary give his consent!"
"this is dreadful. let us speak and think no more about it, till we see
the issue. in the meantime, let us do that which is our bounden
duty—go and divulge all that we know relating to this foul murder."
accordingly the two women went to sir thomas wallace of craigie, the
lord justice clerk (who was, i think, either uncle or grandfather to
young drummond, who was outlawed and obliged to fly his country on
account of colwan's death), and to that gentleman they related every
circumstance of what they had seen and heard. he examined calvert very
minutely, and seemed deeply interested in her evidence—said he knew
she was relating the truth, and, in testimony of it, brought a letter
of young drummond's from his desk, wherein that young gentleman, after
protesting his innocence in the most forcible terms, confessed having
been with such a woman in such a house, after leaving the company of
his friends; and that, on going home, sir thomas's servant had let him
in, in the dark, and from these circumstances he found it impossible to
prove an alibi. he begged of his relative, if ever an opportunity
offered, to do his endeavour to clear up that mystery, and remove the
horrid stigma from his name in his country, and among his kin, of
having stabbed a friend behind his back.
lord craigie, therefore, directed the two women to the proper
authorities, and, after hearing their evidence there, it was judged
proper to apprehend the present laird of dalcastle, and bring him to
his trial. but, before that, they sent the prisoner in the tolbooth, he
who had seen the whole transaction along with mrs. calvert, to take a
view of wringhim privately; and, his discrimination being so well known
as to be proverbial all over the land, they determined secretly to be
ruled by his report. they accordingly sent him on a pretended mission
of legality to dalcastle, with orders to see and speak with the
proprietor, without giving him a hint what was wanted. on his return,
they examined him, and he told them that he found all things at the
place in utter confusion and dismay; that the lady of the place was
missing, and could not be found, dead or alive. on being asked if he
had ever seen the proprietor before, he looked astounded and unwilling
to answer. but it came out that he had; and that he had once seen him
kill a man on such a spot at such an hour.
officers were then dispatched, without delay, to apprehend the monster,
and bring him to justice. on these going to the mansion, and inquiring
for him, they were told he was at home; on which they stationed guards,
and searched all the premises, but he was not to be found. it was in
vain that they overturned beds, raised floors, and broke open closets:
robert wringhim colwan was lost once and for ever. his mother also was
lost; and strong suspicions attached to some of the farmers and house
servants to whom she was obnoxious, relating to her disappearance.
the honourable thomas drummond became a distinguished officer in the
austrian service, and died in the memorable year for scotland, ;
and this is all with which history, justiciary records, and tradition,
furnish me relating to these matters.
i have now the pleasure of presenting my readers with an original
document of a most singular nature, and preserved for their perusal in
a still more singular manner. i offer no remarks on it, and make as few
additions to it, leaving everyone to judge for himself. we have heard
much of the rage of fanaticism in former days, but nothing to this.
 the private memoirs and
 confessions of a sinner
my life has been a life of trouble and turmoil; of change and
vicissitude; of anger and exultation; of sorrow and of vengeance. my
sorrows have all been for a slighted gospel, and my vengeance has been
wreaked on its adversaries. therefore, in the might of heaven, i will
sit down and write: i will let the wicked of this world know what i
have done in the faith of the promises, and justification by grace,
that they may read and tremble, and bless their gods of silver and gold
that the minister of heaven was removed from their sphere before their
blood was mingled with their sacrifices.
i was born an outcast in the world, in which i was destined to act so
conspicuous a part. my mother was a burning and a shining light, in the
community of scottish worthies, and in the days of her virginity had
suffered much in the persecution of the saints. but it so pleased
heaven that, as a trial of her faith, she was married to one of the
wicked; a man all over spotted with the leprosy of sin. as well might
they have conjoined fire and water together, in hopes that they would
consort and amalgamate, as purity and corruption: she fled from his
embraces the first night after their marriage, and from that time forth
his iniquities so galled her upright heart that she quitted his society
altogether, keeping her own apartments in the same house with him.
i was the second son of this unhappy marriage, and, ere ever i was
born, my father according to the flesh disclaimed all relation or
connection with me, and all interest in me, save what the law compelled
him to take, which was to grant me a scanty maintenance; and had it not
been for a faithful minister of the gospel, my mother's early
instructor, i should have remained an outcast from the church visible.
he took pity on me, admitting me not only into that, but into the bosom
of his own household and ministry also, and to him am i indebted, under
heaven, for the high conceptions and glorious discernment between good
and evil, right and wrong, which i attained even at an early age. it
was he who directed my studies aright, both in the learning of the
ancient fathers and the doctrines of the reformed church, and designed
me for his assistant and successor in the holy office. i missed no
opportunity of perfecting myself particularly in all the minute points
of theology in which my reverend father and mother took great delight;
but at length i acquired so much skill that i astonished my teachers,
and made them gaze at one another. i remember that it was the custom,
in my patron's house, to ask questions of the single catechism round
every sabbath night. he asked the first, my mother the second, and so
on, everyone saying the question asked and then asking the next. it
fell to my mother to ask effectual calling at me. i said the answer
with propriety and emphasis. "now, madam," added i, "my question to you
is: what is ineffectual calling?"
"ineffectual calling? there is no such thing, robert," said she.
"but there is, madam," said i, and that answer proves how much you say
these fundamental precepts by rote, and without any consideration.
ineffectual calling is the outward call of the gospel without any
effect on the hearts of unregenerated and impenitent sinners. have not
all these the same calls, warnings, doctrines, and reproofs, that we
have? and is not this ineffectual calling? has not ardinferry the same?
has not patrick m'lure the same? has not the laird of dalcastle and his
reprobate heir the same? and will any tell me that this is not
ineffectual calling?"
"what a wonderful boy he is!" said my mother.
"i'm feared he turn out to be a conceited gowk," said old barnet, the
minister's man.
"no," said my pastor, and father (as i shall henceforth denominate
him). "no, barnet, he is a wonderful boy; and no marvel, for i have
prayed for these talents to be bestowed on him from his infancy: and do
you think that heaven would refuse a prayer so disinterested? no, it is
impossible. but my dread is, madam," continued he, turning to my
mother, "that he is yet in the bond of iniquity."
"god forbid!" said my mother.
"i have struggled with the almighty long and hard," continued he; "but
have as yet no certain token of acceptance in his behalf, i have indeed
fought a hard fight, but have been repulsed by him who hath seldom
refused my request; although i cited his own words against him, and
endeavoured to hold him at his promise, he hath so many turnings in the
supremacy of his power, that i have been rejected. how dreadful is it
to think of our darling being still without the pale of the covenant!
but i have vowed a vow, and in that there is hope."
my heart quaked with terror when i thought of being still living in a
state of reprobation, subjected to the awful issues of death, judgment,
and eternal misery, by the slightest accident or casualty; and i set
about the duty of prayer myself with the utmost earnestness. i prayed
three times every day, and seven times on the sabbath; but, the more
frequently and fervently that i prayed, i sinned still the more. about
this time, and for a long period afterwards, amounting to several
years, i lived in a hopeless and deplorable state of mind; for i said
to myself, "if my name is not written in the book of life from all
eternity, it is in vain for me to presume that either vows or prayers
of mine, or those of all mankind combined, can ever procure its
insertion now." i had come under many vows, most solemnly taken, every
one of which i had broken; and i saw with the intensity of juvenile
grief that there was no hope for me. i went on sinning every hour, and
all the while most strenuously warring against sin, and repenting of
every one transgression as soon after the commission of it as i got
leisure to think. but, oh, what a wretched state this unregenerated
state is, in which every effort after righteousness only aggravates our
offences! i found it vanity to contend; for, after communing with my
heart, the conclusion was as follows: "if i could repent me of all my
sins, and shed tears of blood for them, still have i not a load of
original transgression pressing on me that is enough to crush me to the
lowest hell. i may be angry with my first parents for having sinned,
but how i shall repent me of their sin is beyond what i am able to
comprehend."
still, in those days of depravity and corruption, i had some of those
principles implanted in my mind which were afterwards to spring up with
such amazing fertility among the heroes of the faith and the promises.
in particular, i felt great indignation against all the wicked of this
world, and often wished for the means of ridding it of such a noxious
burden. i liked john barnet, my reverend father's serving-man,
extremely ill; but, from a supposition that he might be one of the
justified, i refrained from doing him any injury. he gave always his
word against me, and when we were by ourselves, in the barn or the
fields, he rated me with such severity for my faults that my heart
could brook it no longer. he discovered some notorious lies that i had
framed, and taxed me with them in such a manner that i could in no wise
get off. my cheek burnt, with offence, rather than shame; and he,
thinking he had got the mastery of me, exulted over me most
unmercifully, telling me i was a selfish and conceited blackguard, who
made great pretences towards religious devotion to cloak a disposition
tainted with deceit, and that it would not much astonish him if i
brought myself to the gallows.
i gathered some courage from his over-severity, and answered him as
follows: "who made thee a judge of the actions or dispositions of the
almighty's creatures—thou who art a worm and no man in his sight? how
it befits thee to deal out judgments and anathemas! hath he not made
one vessel to honour, and another to dishonour, as in the case with
myself and thee? hath he not builded his stories in the heavens, and
laid the foundations thereof in the earth, and how can a being like
thee judge between good and evil, that are both subjected to the
workings of his hand; or of the opposing principles in the soul of man,
correcting, modifying, and refining one another?"
i said this with that strong display of fervour for which i was
remarkable at my years, and expected old barnet to be utterly
confounded; but he only shook his head, and, with the most provoking
grin, said: "there he goes! sickan sublime and ridiculous sophistry i
never heard come out of another mouth but ane. there needs nae aiths to
be sworn afore the session wha is your father, young goodman. i ne'er,
for my part, saw a son sac like a dad, sin' my een first opened." with
that he went away, saying with an ill-natured wince: "you made to
honour and me to dishonour! dirty bow-kail thing that thou be'st!"
"i will have the old rascal on the hip for this, if i live," thought i.
so i went and asked my mother if john was a righteous man. she could
not tell, but supposed he was, and therefore i got no encouragement
from her. i went next to my reverend father, and inquired his opinion,
expecting as little from that quarter. he knew the elect as it were by
instinct, and could have told you of all those in his own, and some
neighbouring parishes, who were born within the boundaries of the
covenant of promise, and who were not.
"i keep a good deal in company with your servant, old barnet, father,"
said i.
"you do, boy, you do, i see," said he.
"i wish i may not keep too much in his company," said i, "not knowing
what kind of society i am in. is john a good man, father?"
"why, boy, he is but so so. a morally good man john is, but very little
of the leaven of true righteousness, which is faith, within. i am
afraid old barnet, with all his stock of morality, will be a castaway."
my heart was greatly cheered by this remark; and i sighed very deeply,
and hung my head to one side. the worthy father observed me, and
inquired the cause, when i answered as follows: "how dreadful the
thought, that i have been going daily in company and fellowship with
one whose name is written on the red-letter side of the book of life;
whose body and soul have been, from all eternity, consigned over to
everlasting destruction, and to whom the blood of the atonement can
never, never reach! father, this is an awful thing, and beyond my
comprehension."
"while we are in the world, we must mix with the inhabitants thereof,"
said he; "and the stains which adhere to us by reason of this mixture,
which is unavoidable, shall all be washed away. it is our duty,
however, to shun the society of wicked men as much as possible, lest we
partake of their sins, and become sharers with them in punishment.
john, however, is morally a good man, and may yet get a cast of grace."
"i always thought him a good man till to-day," said i, "when he threw
out some reflections on your character, so horrible that i quake to
think of the wickedness and malevolence of his heart. he was rating me
very impertinently for some supposed fault, which had no being save in
his own jealous brain, when i attempted to reason him out of his belief
in the spirit of calm christian argument. but how do you think he
answered me? he did so, sir, by twisting his mouth at me, and remarking
that such sublime and ridiculous sophistry never came out of another
mouth but one (meaning yours) and that no oath before a kirk session
was necessary to prove who was my dad, for that he had never seen a son
so like a father as i was like mine."
"he durst not for his soul's salvation, and for his daily bread, which
he values much more, say such a word, boy; therefore, take care what
you assert," said my reverend father.
"he said these very words, and will not deny them, sir," said i.
my reverend father turned about in great wrath and indignation, and
went away in search of john, but i kept out of the way, and listened at
a back window; for john was dressing the plot of ground behind the
house; and i hope it was no sin in me that i did rejoice in the
dialogue which took place, it being the victory of righteousness over
error.
"well, john, this is a fine day for your delving work."
"ay, it's a tolerable day, sir."
"are you thankful in heart, john, for such temporal mercies as these?"
"aw doubt we're a' ower little thankfu', sir, baith for temporal an'
speeritual mercies; but it isna aye the maist thankfu' heart that maks
the greatest fraze wi' the tongue."
"i hope there is nothing personal under that remark, john?"
"gin the bannet fits ony body's head, they're unco welcome to it, sir,
for me."
"john, i do not approve of these innuendoes. you have an arch malicious
manner of vending your aphorisms, which the men of the world are too
apt to read the wrong way, for your dark hints are sure to have one
very bad meaning."
"hout na, sir, it's only bad folks that think sac. they find ma bits o'
gibes come hame to their hearts wi' a kind o' yerk, an' that gars them
wince."
"that saying is ten times worse than the other, john; it is a manifest
insult: it is just telling me to my face that you think me a bad man."
"a body canna help his thoughts, sir."
"no, but a man's thoughts are generally formed from observation. now i
should like to know, even from the mouth of a misbeliever, what part of
my conduct warrants such a conclusion."
"nae particular pairt, sir; i draw a' my conclusions frae the haill o'
a man's character, an' i'm no that aften far wrong."
"well, john, and what sort of general character do you suppose mine to
be?"
"yours is a scripture character, sir, an' i'll prove it."
"i hope so, john. well, which of the scripture characters do you think
approximates nearest to my own?"
"guess, sir, guess; i wish to lead a proof."
"why, if it be an old testament character, i hope it is melchizedek,
for at all events you cannot deny there is one point of resemblance: i,
like him, am a preacher of righteousness. if it be a new testament
character, i suppose you mean the apostle of the gentiles, of whom i am
an unworthy representative."
"na, na, sir, better nor that still, an' fer closer is the resemblance.
when ye bring me to the point, i maun speak. ye are the just pharisee,
sir, that gaed up wi' the poor publican to pray in the temple; an'
ye're acting the very same pairt at this time, an' saying i' your
heart, 'god, i thank thee that i am not as other men are, an' in nae
way like this poor misbelieving unregenerate sinner, john barnet.'"
"i hope i may say so indeed."
"there now! i tauld you how it was! but, d'ye hear, maister. here
stands the poor sinner, john barnet, your beadle an' servantman, wha
wadna change chances wi' you in the neist world, nor consciences in
this, for ten times a' that you possess—your justification by faith
an' awthegither."
"you are extremely audacious and impertinent, john; but the language of
reprobation cannot affect me: i came only to ask you one question,
which i desire you to answer candidly. did you ever say to anyone that
i was the boy robert's natural father?"
"hout na, sir! ha-ha-ha! aih, fie, na, sir! i durst-na say that for my
life. i doubt the black stool, an' the sack gown, or maybe the juggs
wad hae been my portion had i said sic a thing as that. hout, hout!
fie, fie! unco-like doings thae for a melchizedek or a saint paul!"
"john, you are a profane old man, and i desire that you will not
presume to break your jests on me. tell me, dare you say, or dare you
think, that i am the natural father of that boy?"
"ye canna hinder me to think whatever i like, sir, nor can i hinder
mysel."
"but did you ever say to anyone that he resembled me, and fathered
himself well enough?"
"i hae said mony a time that he resembled you, sir. naebody can mistake
that."
"but, john, there are many natural reasons for such likenesses, besides
that of consanguinity. they depend much on the thoughts and affections
of the mother; and it is probable that the mother of this boy, being
deserted by her worthless husband, having turned her thoughts on me, as
likely to be her protector, may have caused this striking resemblance."
"ay, it may be, sir. i coudna say."
"i have known a lady, john, who was delivered of a blackamoor child,
merely from the circumstance of having got a start by the sudden
entrance of her negro servant, and not being able to forget him for
several hours."
"it may be, sir; but i ken this—an' i had been the laird, i wadna hae
ta'en that story in."
"so, then, john, you positively think, from a casual likeness, that
this boy is my son?"
"man's thoughts are vanity, sir; they come unasked, an' gang away
without a dismissal, an' he canna' help them. i'm neither gaun to say
that i think he's your son, nor that i think he's no your son: sae ye
needna pose me nae mair about it."
"hear then my determination, john. if you do not promise to me, in
faith and honour, that you never will say, or insinuate such a thing
again in your life, as that that boy is my natural son, i will take the
keys of the church from you, and dismiss you from my service."
john pulled out the keys, and dashed them on the gravel at the reverend
minister's feet. "there are the keys o' your kirk, sir! i hae never had
muckle mense o' them sin' ye entered the door o't. i hae carried them
this three and thretty year, but they hae aye been like to burn a hole
i' my pouch sin' ever they were turned for your admittance. tak them
again, an' gie them to wha you will, and muckle gude may he get o'
them. auld john may dee a beggar in a hay barn, or at the back of a
dike, but he sall aye be master o' his ain thoughts an' gie them vent
or no, as he likes."
he left the manse that day, and i rejoiced in the riddance; for i
disdained to be kept so much under by one who was in bond of iniquity,
and of whom there seemed no hope, as he rejoiced in his frowardness,
and refused to submit to that faithful teacher, his master.
it was about this time that my reverend father preached a sermon, one
sentence of which affected me most disagreeably. it was to the purport
that every unrepented sin was productive of a new sin with each breath
that a man drew; and every one of these new sins added to the catalogue
in the same manner. i was utterly confounded at the multitude of my
transgressions; for i was sensible that there were great numbers of
sins of which i had never been able thoroughly to repent, and these
momentary ones, by moderate calculation, had, i saw, long ago, amounted
to a hundred and fifty thousand in the minute, and i saw no end to the
series of repentances to which i had subjected myself. a life-time was
nothing to enable me to accomplish the sum, and then being, for
anything i was certain of, in my state of nature, and the grace of
repentance withheld from me—what was i to do, or what was to become of
me? in the meantime, i went on sinning without measure; but i was still
more troubled about the multitude than the magnitude of my
transgressions, and the small minute ones puzzled me more than those
that were more heinous, as the latter had generally some good effects
in the way of punishing wicked men, froward boys, and deceitful women;
and i rejoiced, even then in my early youth, at being used as a scourge
in the hand of the lord; another jehu, a cyrus, or a nebuchadnezzar.
on the whole, i remember that i got into great confusion relating to my
sins and repentances, and knew neither where to begin nor how to
proceed, and often had great fears that i was wholly without christ,
and that i would find god a consuming fire to me. i could not help
running into new sins continually; but then i was mercifully dealt
with, for i was often made to repent of them most heartily, by reason
of bodily chastisements received on these delinquencies being
discovered. i was particularly prone to lying, and i cannot but admire
the mercy that has freely forgiven me all these juvenile sins. now that
i know them all to be blotted out, and that i am an accepted person, i
may the more freely confess them: the truth is, that one lie always
paved the way for another, from hour to hour, from day to day, and from
year to year; so that i found myself constantly involved in a labyrinth
of deceit, from which it was impossible to extricate myself. if i knew
a person to be a godly one, i could almost have kissed his feet; but,
against the carnal portion of mankind, i set my face continually. i
esteemed the true ministers of the gospel; but the prelatic party, and
the preachers up of good works i abhorred, and to this hour i account
them the worst and most heinous of all transgressors.
there was only one boy at mr. witch's class who kept always the upper
hand of me in every part of education. i strove against him from year
to year, but it was all in vain; for he was a very wicked boy, and i
was convinced he had dealings with the devil. indeed, it was believed
all over the country that his mother was a witch; and i was at length
convinced, that it was no human ingenuity that beat me with so much
ease in the latin, after i had often sat up a whole night with my
reverend father, studying my lesson in all its bearings. i often read
as well and sometimes better than he; but, the moment mr. wilson began
to examine us, my opponent popped up above me. i determined (as i knew
him for a wicked person, and one of the devil's handfasted children) to
be revenged on him, and to humble him by some means or other.
accordingly i lost no opportunity of setting the master against him,
and succeeded several times in getting him severely beaten for faults
of which he was innocent. i can hardly describe the joy that it gave to
my heart to see a wicked creature suffering, for, though he deserved it
not for one thing, he richly deserved it for others. this may be by
some people accounted a great sin in me; but i deny it, for i did it as
a duty, and what a man or boy does for the right will never be put into
the sum of his transgressions.
this boy, whose name was m'gill, was, at all his leisure hours, engaged
in drawing profane pictures of beasts, men, women, houses, and trees,
and, in short, of all things that his eye encountered. these profane
things the master often smiled at, and admired; therefore i began
privately to try my hand likewise. i had scarcely tried above once to
draw the figure of a man, ere i conceived that i had hit the very
features of mr. wilson. they were so particular that they could not be
easily mistaken, and i was so tickled and pleased with the droll
likeness that i had drawn that i laughed immoderately at it. i tried no
other figure but this; and i tried it in every situation in which a man
and a schoolmaster could be placed. i often wrought for hours together
at this likeness, nor was it long before i made myself so much master
of the outline that i could have drawn it in any situation whatever,
almost off hand. i then took m'gill's account book of algebra home with
me, and at my leisure put down a number of gross caricatures of mr.
wilson here and there, several of them in situations notoriously
ludicrous. i waited the discovery of this treasure with great
impatience; but the book, chancing to be one that m'gill was not using,
i saw it might be long enough before i enjoyed the consummation of my
grand scheme: therefore, with all the ingenuity i was master of, i
brought it before our dominie's eye. but never shall i forget the rage
that gleamed in the tyrant's phiz! i was actually terrified to look at
him, and trembled at his voice. m'gill was called upon, and examined
relating to the obnoxious figures. he denied flatly that any of them
were of his doing. but the master inquiring at him whose they were, he
could not tell, but affirmed it to be some trick. mr. wilson at one
time began, as i thought, to hesitate; but the evidence was so strong
against m'gill that at length his solemn asseverations of innocence
only proved an aggravation of his crime. there was not one in the
school who had ever been known to draw a figure but himself, and on him
fell the whole weight of the tyrant's vengeance. it was dreadful; and i
was once in hopes that he would not leave life in the culprit. he,
however, left the school for several months, refusing to return to be
subjected to punishment for the faults of others, and i stood king of
the class.
matters, were at last made up between m'gill's parents and the
schoolmaster, but by that time i had got the start of him, and never in
my life did i exert myself so much as to keep the mastery. it was in
vain; the powers of enchantment prevailed, and i was again turned down
with the tear in my eye. i could think of no amends but one, and, being
driven to desperation, i put it in practice. i told a lie of him. i
came boldly up to the master, and told him that m'gill had in my
hearing cursed him in a most shocking manner, and called him vile
names. he called m'gill, and charged him with the crime, and the proud
young coxcomb was so stunned at the atrocity of the charge that his
face grew as red as crimson, and the words stuck in his throat as he
feebly denied it. his guilt was manifest, and he was again flogged most
nobly and dismissed the school for ever in disgrace, as a most
incorrigible vagabond.
this was a great victory gained, and i rejoiced and exulted exceedingly
in it. it had, however, very nigh cost me my life; for not long
thereafter i encountered m'gill in the fields, on which he came up and
challenged me for a liar, daring me to fight him. i refused, and said
that i looked on him as quite below my notice; but he would not quit
me, and finally told me that he should either lick me, or i should lick
him, as he had no other means of being revenged on such a scoundrel. i
tried to intimidate him, but it would not do; and i believe i would
have given all that i had in the world to be quit of him. he at length
went so far as first to kick me, and then strike me on the face; and,
being both older and stronger than he, i thought it scarcely became me
to take such insults patiently. i was, nevertheless, well aware that
the devilish powers of his mother would finally prevail; and either the
dread of this, or the inward consciousness of having wronged him,
certainly unnerved my arm, for i fought wretchedly, and was soon wholly
overcome. i was so sore defeated that i kneeled and was going to beg
his pardon; but another thought struck me momentarily, and i threw
myself on my face, and inwardly begged aid from heaven; at the same
time i felt as if assured that my prayer was heard, and would be
answered. while i was in this humble attitude, the villain kicked me
with his foot and cursed me; and i, being newly encouraged, arose and
encountered him once more. we had not fought long at this second turn
before i saw a man hastening towards us; on which i uttered a shout of
joy, and laid on valiantly; but my very next look assured me that the
man was old john barnet, whom i had likewise wronged all that was in my
power, and between these two wicked persons i expected anything but
justice. my arm was again enfeebled, and that of my adversary
prevailed. i was knocked down and mauled most grievously, and, while
the ruffian was kicking and cuffing me at his will and pleasure, up
came old john barnet, breathless with running, and, at one blow with
his open hand, levelled my opponent with the earth. "tak ye that,
maister!" said john, "to learn ye better breeding. hout awa, man! an ye
will fight, fight fair. gude sauf us, ir ye a gentleman's brood, that
ye will kick an' cuff a lad when he's down?"
when i heard this kind and unexpected interference, i began once more
to value myself on my courage, and, springing up, i made at my
adversary; but john, without saying a word, bit his lip, and seizing me
by the neck threw me down. m'gill begged of him to stand and see fair
play, and suffer us to finish the battle; for, added he, "he is a liar,
and a scoundrel, and deserves ten times more than i can give him."
"i ken he's a' that ye say, an' mair, my man," quoth john. "but am i
sure that ye're no as bad, an' waur? it says nae muckle for ony o' ye
to be tearing like tikes at one anither here."
john cocked his cudgel and stood between us, threatening to knock the
one dead who first offered to lift his hand against the other; but,
perceiving no disposition in any of us to separate, he drove me home
before him like a bullock, and keeping close guard behind me, lest
m'gill had followed. i felt greatly indebted to john, yet i complained
of his interference to my mother, and the old officious sinner got no
thanks for his pains.
as i am writing only from recollection, so i remember of nothing
farther in these early days, in the least worthy of being recorded.
that i was a great, a transcendent sinner, i confess. but still i had
hopes of forgiveness, because i never sinned from principle, but
accident; and then i always tried to repent of these sins by the slump,
for individually it was impossible; and, though not always successful
in my endeavours, i could not help that, the grace of repentance being
withheld from me, i regarded myself as in no degree accountable for the
failure. moreover, there were many of the most deadly sins into which i
never fell, for i dreaded those mentioned in the revelations as
excluding sins, so that i guarded against them continually. in
particular, i brought myself to despise, if not to abhor, the beauty of
women, looking on it as the greatest snare to which mankind was
subjected, and though young men and maidens, and even old women (my
mother among the rest), taxed me with being an unnatural wretch, i
gloried in my acquisition; and, to this day, am thankful for having
escaped the most dangerous of all snares.
i kept myself also free of the sins of idolatry and misbelief, both of
a deadly nature; and, upon the whole, i think i had not then broken,
that is, absolutely broken, above four out of the ten commandments;
but, for all that, i had more sense than to regard either my good
works, or my evil deeds, as in the smallest degree influencing the
eternal decrees of god concerning me, either with regard to my
acceptance or reprobation. i depended entirely on the bounty of free
grace, holding all the righteousness of man as filthy rags, and
believing in the momentous and magnificent truth that, the more heavily
loaden with transgressions, the more welcome was the believer at the
throne of grace. and i have reason to believe that it was this
dependence and this belief that at last ensured my acceptance there.
i come now to the most important period of my existence—the period
that has modelled my character, and influenced every action of my
life—without which, this detail of my actions would have been as a
tale that hath been told—a monotonous farrago—an uninteresting
harangue—in short, a thing of nothing. whereas, lo! it must now be a
relation of great and terrible actions, done in the might, and by the
commission of heaven. amen.
like the sinful king of israel, i had been walking softly before the
lord for a season. i had been humbled for my transgressions, and, as
far as i recollect, sorry on account of their numbers and heinousness.
my reverend father had been, moreover, examining me every day regarding
the state of my soul, and my answers sometimes appeared to give him
satisfaction, and sometimes not. as for my mother, she would harp on
the subject of my faith for ever; yet, though i knew her to be a
christian, i confess that i always despised her motley instructions,
nor had i any great regard for her person. if this was a crime in me, i
never could help it. i confess it freely, and believe it was a judgment
from heaven inflicted on her for some sin of former days, and that i
had no power to have acted otherwise towards her than i did.
in this frame of mind was i when my reverend father one morning arose
from his seat, and, meeting me as i entered the room, he embraced me,
and welcomed me into the community of the just upon earth. i was struck
speechless, and could make no answer save by looks of surprise. my
mother also came to me, kissed, and wept over me; and, after showering
unnumbered blessings on my head, she also welcomed me into the society
of the just made perfect. then each of them took me by a hand, and my
reverend father explained to me how he had wrestled with god, as the
patriarch of old had done, not for a night, but for days and years, and
that in bitterness and anguish of spirit, on my account; but, that he
had at last prevailed, and had now gained the long and earnestly
desired assurance of my acceptance with the almighty, in and through
the merits and sufferings of his son. that i was now a justified
person, adopted among the number of god's children—my name written in
the lamb's book of life, and that no by-past transgression, nor any
future act of my own, or of other men, could be instrumental in
altering the decree. "all the powers of darkness," added he, "shall
never be able to pluck you again out of your redeemer's hand. and now,
my son, be strong and steadfast in the truth. set your face against
sin, and sinful men, and resist even to blood, as many of the faithful
of this land have done, and your reward shall be double. i am assured
of your acceptance by the word and spirit of him who cannot err, and
your sanctification and repentance unto life will follow in due course.
rejoice and be thankful, for you are plucked as a brand out of the
burning, and now your redemption is sealed and sure."
i wept for joy to be thus assured of my freedom from all sin, and of
the impossibility of my ever again falling away from my new state. i
bounded away into the fields and the woods, to pour out my spirit in
prayer before the almighty for his kindness to me: my whole frame
seemed to be renewed; every nerve was buoyant with new life; i felt as
if i could have flown in the air, or leaped over the tops of the trees.
an exaltation of spirit lifted me, as it were, far above the earth and
the sinful creatures crawling on its surface; and i deemed myself as
an eagle among the children of men, soaring on high, and looking down
with pity and contempt on the grovelling creatures below.
as i thus wended my way, i beheld a young man of a mysterious
appearance coming towards me. i tried to shun him, being bent on my own
contemplations; but he cast himself in my way, so that i could not well
avoid him; and, more than that, i felt a sort of invisible power that
drew me towards him, something like the force of enchantment, which i
could not resist. as we approached each other, our eyes met and i can
never describe the strange sensations that thrilled through my whole
frame at that impressive moment; a moment to me fraught with the most
tremendous consequences; the beginning of a series of adventures which
has puzzled myself, and will puzzle the world when i am no more in it.
that time will now soon arrive, sooner than anyone can devise who knows
not the tumult of my thoughts and the labour of my spirit; and when it
hath come and passed over, when my flesh and my bones are decayed, and
my soul has passed to its everlasting home, then shall the sons of men
ponder on the events of my life; wonder and tremble, and tremble and
wonder how such things should be.
that strange youth and i approached each other in silence, and slowly,
with our eyes fixed on each other's eyes. we approached till not more
than a yard intervened between us, and then stood still and gazed,
measuring each other from head to foot. what was my astonishment on
perceiving that he was the same being as myself! the clothes were the
same to the smallest item. the form was the same; the apparent age; the
colour of the hair; the eyes; and, as far as recollection could serve
me from viewing my own features in a glass, the features too were the
very same. i conceived at first that i saw a vision, and that my
guardian angel had appeared to me at this important era of my life; but
this singular being read my thoughts in my looks, anticipating the very
words that i was going to utter.
"you think i am your brother," said he; "or that i am your second self.
i am indeed your brother, not according to the flesh, but in my belief
of the same truths, and my assurance in the same mode of redemption,
than which i hold nothing so great or so glorious on earth."
"then you are an associate well adapted to my present state," said i.
"for this time is a time of great rejoicing in spirit to me. i am on my
way to return thanks to the most high for my redemption from the bonds
of sin and misery. if you will join with me heart and hand in youthful
thanksgiving, then shall we two go and worship together; but, if not,
go your way, and i shall go mine."
"ah, you little know with how much pleasure i will accompany you, and
join with you in your elevated devotions," said he fervently. "your
state is a state to be envied indeed; but i have been advised of it,
and am come to be a humble disciple of yours; to be initiated into the
true way of salvation by conversing with you, and perhaps of being
assisted by your prayers."
my spiritual pride being greatly elevated by this address, i began to
assume the preceptor, and questioned this extraordinary youth with
regard to his religious principles, telling him plainly, if he was one
who expected acceptance with god at all, on account of good works, that
i would hold no communion with him. he renounced these at once, with
the greatest vehemence, and declared his acquiescence in my faith. i
asked if he believed in the eternal and irrevocable decrees of god,
regarding the salvation and condemnation of all mankind? he answered
that he did so: aye, what would signify all things else that he
believed, if he did not believe in that? we then went on to commune
about all our points of belief; and in everything that i suggested he
acquiesced, and, as i thought that day, often carried them to extremes,
so that i had a secret dread he was advancing blasphemies. he had such
a way with him, and paid such a deference to all my opinions, that i
was quite captivated, and, at the same time, i stood in a sort of awe
of him, which i could not account for, and several times was seized
with an involuntary inclination to escape from his presence by making a
sudden retreat. but he seemed constantly to anticipate my thoughts, and
was sure to divert my purpose by some turn in the conversation that
particularly interested me. he took care to dwell much on the theme of
the impossibility of those ever falling away who were once accepted and
received into covenant with god, for he seemed to know that in that
confidence, and that trust, my whole hopes were centred.
we moved about from one place to another, until the day was wholly
spent. my mind had all the while been kept in a state of agitation
resembling the motion of a whirlpool, and, when we came to separate, i
then discovered that the purpose for which i had sought the fields had
been neglected, and that i had been diverted from the worship of god by
attending to the quibbles and dogmas of this singular and unaccountable
being, who seemed to have more knowledge and information than all the
persons i had ever known put together.
we parted with expressions of mutual regret, and when i left him i felt
a deliverance, but at the same time a certain consciousness that i was
not thus to get free of him, but that he was like to be an acquaintance
that was to stick to me for good or for evil. i was astonished at his
acuteness and knowledge about everything; but, as for his likeness to
me, that was quite unaccountable. he was the same person in every
respect, but yet he was not always so; for i observed several times,
when we were speaking of certain divines and their tenets, that his
face assumed something of the appearance of theirs; and it struck me
that, by setting his features to the mould of other people's, he
entered at once into their conceptions and feelings. i had been greatly
flattered, and greatly interested by his conversation; whether i had
been the better for it or the worse, i could not tell. i had been
diverted from returning thanks to my gracious maker for his great
kindness to me, and came home as i went away, but not with the same
buoyancy and lightness of heart. well may i remember the day in which
i was first received into the number, and made an heir to all the
privileges of the children of god, and on which i first met this
mysterious associate, who from that day forth contrived to wind himself
into all my affairs, both spiritual and temporal, to this day on which
i am writing the account of it. it was on the th day of march, ,
when i had just entered the eighteenth year of my age. whether it
behoves me to bless god for the events of that day, or to deplore them,
has been hid from my discernment, though i have inquired into it with
fear and trembling; and i have now lost all hopes of ever discovering
the true import of these events until that day when my accounts are to
make up and reckon for in another world.
when i came home, i went straight into the parlour, where my mother was
sitting by herself. she started to her feet, and uttered a smothered
scream. "what ails you, robert?" cried she. "my dear son, what is the
matter with you?"
"do you see anything the matter with me?" said i. "it appears that the
ailment is with yourself and either in your crazed head or your dim
eyes, for there is nothing the matter with me."
"ah, robert, you are ill!" cried she. "you are very ill, my dear boy;
you are quite changed; your very voice and manner are changed. ah,
jane, haste you up to the study, and tell mr. wringhim to come here on
the instant and speak to robert."
"i beseech you, woman, to restrain yourself," said i. "if you suffer
your frenzy to run away with your judgment in this manner, i will leave
the house. what do you mean? i tell you, there is nothing ails me: i
never was better."
she screamed, and ran between me and the door, to bar my retreat: in
the meantime my reverend father entered, and i have not forgot how he
gazed, through his glasses, first at my mother, and then at me. i
imagined that his eyes burnt like candles, and was afraid of him, which
i suppose made my looks more unstable than they would otherwise have
been.
"what is all this for?" said he. "mistress! robert! what is the matter
here?"
"oh, sir, our boy!" cried my mother; "our dear boy, mr. wringhim! look
at him, and speak to him: he is either dying or translated, sir!"
he looked at me with a countenance of great alarm; mumbling some
sentences to himself, and then taking me by the arm, as if to feel my
pulse, he said, with a faltering voice: "something has indeed befallen
you, either in body or mind, boy, for you are transformed, since the
morning, that i could not have known you for the same person. have you
met with any accident?"
"no."
"have you seen anything out of the ordinary course of nature?"
"no."
"then, satan, i fear, has been busy with you, tempting you in no
ordinary degree at this momentous crisis of your life?"
my mind turned on my associate for the day, and the idea that he might
be an agent of the devil had such an effect on me that i could make no
answer.
"i see how it is," said he; "you are troubled in spirit, and i have no
doubt that the enemy of our salvation has been busy with you. tell me
this, has he overcome you, or has he not?"
"he has not, my dear father," said i. "in the strength of the lord, i
hope i have withstood him. but indeed, if he has been busy with me, i
knew it not. i have been conversant this day with one stranger only,
whom i took rather for an angel of light."
"it is one of the devil's most profound wiles to appear like one," said
my mother.
"woman, hold thy peace!" said my reverend father. "thou pretendest to
teach what thou knowest not. tell me this, boy: did this stranger, with
whom you met, adhere to the religious principles in which i have
educated you?"
"yes, to every one of them in their fullest latitude," said i.
"then he was no agent of the wicked one with whom you held converse,"
said he: "for that is the doctrine that was made to overturn the
principalities and powers, the might and dominion of the kingdom of
darkness. let us pray."
after spending about a quarter of an hour in solemn and sublime
thanksgiving, this saintly man and minister of christ jesus, gave out
that the day following should be kept by the family as a day of solemn
thanksgiving, and spent in prayer and praise, on account of the calling
and election of one of its members; or rather for the election of that
individual being revealed on earth, as well as confirmed in heaven.
the next day was with me a day of holy exultation. it was begun by my
reverend father laying his hands upon my head and blessing me, and then
dedicating me to the lord in the most awful and impressive manner. it
was in no common way that he exercised this profound rite, for it was
done with all the zeal and enthusiasm of a devotee to the true cause,
and a champion on the side he had espoused. he used these remarkable
words, which i have still treasured up in my heart: "i give him unto
thee only, to thee wholly, and to thee for ever. i dedicate him unto
thee, soul, body, and spirit. not as the wicked of this world, or the
hirelings of a church profanely called by thy name, do i dedicate this
thy servant to thee: not in words and form, learned by rote, and
dictated by the limbs of antichrist, but, lord, i give him into thy
hand, as a captain putteth a sword into the hand of his sovereign,
wherewith to lay waste his enemies. may he be a two-edged weapon in thy
hand and a spear coming out of thy mouth, to destroy, and overcome, and
pass over; and may the enemies of thy church fall down before him, and
be as dung to fat the land!"
from the moment, i conceived it decreed, not that i should be a
minister of the gospel, but a champion of it, to cut off the enemies of
the lord from the face of the earth; and i rejoiced in the commission,
finding it more congenial to my nature to be cutting sinners off with
the sword than to be haranguing them from the pulpit, striving to
produce an effect which god, by his act of absolute predestination, had
for ever rendered impracticable. the more i pondered on these things
the more i saw of the folly and inconsistency of ministers in spending
their lives striving and remonstrating with sinners in order to induce
them to do that which they had it not in their power to do. seeing that
god had from all eternity decided the fate of every individual that was
to be born of woman, how vain was it in man to endeavour to save those
whom their maker had, by an unchangeable decree, doomed to destruction.
i could not disbelieve the doctrine which the best of men had taught
me, and towards which he made the whole of the scriptures to bear, and
yet it made the economy of the christian world appear to me as an
absolute contradiction. how much more wise would it be, thought i, to
begin and cut sinners off with the sword! for till that is effected,
the saints can never inherit the earth in peace. should i be honoured
as an instrument to begin this great work of purification, i should
rejoice in it. but, then, where had i the means, or under what
direction was i to begin? there was one thing clear, i was now the
lord's and it behoved me to bestir myself in his service. oh that i had
an host at my command, then would i be as a devouring fire among the
workers of iniquity!
full of these great ideas, i hurried through the city, and sought again
the private path through the field and wood of finnieston, in which my
reverend preceptor had the privilege of walking for study, and to which
he had a key that was always at my command. near one of the stiles, i
perceived a young man sitting in a devout posture, reading a bible. he
rose, lifted his hat, and made an obeisance to me, which i returned and
walked on. i had not well crossed the stile till it struck me i knew
the face of the youth and that he was some intimate acquaintance, to
whom i ought to have spoken. i walked on, and returned, and walked on
again, trying to recollect who he was; but for my life i could not.
there was, however, a fascination in his look and manner that drew me
back towards him in spite of myself, and i resolved to go to him, if it
were merely to speak and see who he was.
i came up to him and addressed him, but he was so intent on his book
that, though i spoke, he lifted not his eyes. i looked on the book
also, and still it seemed a bible, having columns, chapters, and
verses; but it was in a language of which i was wholly ignorant, and
all intersected with red lines and verses. a sensation resembling a
stroke of electricity came over me, on first casting my eyes on that
mysterious book, and i stood motionless. he looked up, smiled, closed
his book, and put it in his bosom. "you seem strangely affected, dear
sir, by looking at my book," said he mildly.
"in the name of god, what book is that?" said i. "is it a bible?"
"it is my bible, sir," said he, "but i will cease reading it, for i am
glad to see you. pray, is not this a day for holy festivity with you?"
i stared in his face, but made no answer, for my senses were bewildered.
"do you not know me?" said he. "you appear to be somehow at a loss. had
not you and i some sweet communion and fellowship yesterday?"
"i beg your pardon, sir," said i. "but, surely, if you are the young
gentleman with whom i spent the hours yesterday, you have the chameleon
art of changing your appearance; i never could have recognized you."
"my countenance changes with my studies and sensations," said he. "it
is a natural peculiarity in me, over which i have not full control. if
i contemplate a man's features seriously, mine own gradually assume the
very same appearance and character. and what is more, by contemplating
a face minutely, i not only attain the same likeness but, with the
likeness, i attain the very same ideas as well as the same mode of
arranging them, so that, you see, by looking at a person attentively, i
by degrees assume his likeness, and by assuming his likeness i attain
to the possession of his most secret thoughts. this, i say, is a
peculiarity in my nature, a gift of the god that made me; but, whether
or not given me for a blessing, he knows himself, and so do i. at all
events, i have this privilege, i can never be mistaken of a character
in whom i am interested."
"it is a rare qualification," replied i, "and i would give worlds to
possess it. then, it appears that it is needless to dissemble with you,
since you can at any time extract our most secret thoughts from our
bosoms. you already know my natural character?"
"yes," said he, "and it is that which attaches me to you. by assuming
your likeness yesterday, i became acquainted with your character, and
was no less astonished at the profundity and range of your thoughts
than at the heroic magnanimity with which these were combined. and now,
in addition to these, you are dedicated to the great work of the lord;
for which reasons i have resolved to attach myself as closely to you as
possible, and to render you all the service of which my poor abilities
are capable."
i confess that i was greatly flattered by these compliments paid to my
abilities by a youth of such superior qualifications; by one who, with
a modesty and affability rare at his age, combined a height of genius
and knowledge almost above human comprehension. nevertheless, i began
to assume a certain superiority of demeanour towards him, as judging it
incumbent on me to do so, in order to keep up his idea of my exalted
character. we conversed again till the day was near a close; and the
things that he strove most to inculcate on my mind were the
infallibility of the elect, and the preordination of all things that
come to pass. i pretended to controvert the first of these, for the
purpose of showing him the extent of my argumentative powers, and said
that "indubitably there were degrees of sinning which would induce the
almighty to throw off the very elect." but behold my hitherto humble
and modest companion took up the argument with such warmth that he put
me not only to silence but to absolute shame.
"why, sir," said he, "by vending such an insinuation, you put discredit
on the great atonement, in which you trust. is there not enough of
merit in the blood of jesus to save thousands of worlds, if it was for
these worlds that he died? now, when you know, as you do (and as every
one of the elect may know of himself) that this saviour died for you,
namely and particularly, dare you say that there is not enough of merit
in his great atonement to annihilate all your sins, let them be as
heinous and atrocious as they may? and, moreover, do you not
acknowledge that god hath pre-ordained and decreed whatsoever comes to
pass? then, how is it that you should deem it in your power to eschew
one action of your life, whether good or evil? depend on it, the advice
of the great preacher is genuine: 'what thine hand findeth to do, do it
with all thy might, for none of us knows what a day may bring forth.'
that is, none of us knows what is pre-ordained, but whatever it is
pre-ordained we must do, and none of these things will be laid to our
charge."
i could hardly believe that these sayings were genuine or orthodox; but
i soon felt that, instead of being a humble disciple of mine, this new
acquaintance was to be my guide and director, and all under the humble
guise of one stooping at my feet to learn the right. he said that he
saw i was ordained to perform some great action for the cause of jesus
and his church, and he earnestly coveted being a partaker with me; but
he besought of me never to think it possible for me to fall from the
truth, or the favour of him who had chosen me, else that misbelief
would baulk every good work to which i set my face.
there was something so flattering in all this that i could not resist
it. still, when he took leave of me, i felt it as a great relief; and
yet, before the morrow, i wearied and was impatient to see him again.
we carried on our fellowship from day to day, and all the while i knew
not who he was, and still my mother and reverend father kept insisting
that i was an altered youth, changed in my appearance, my manners, and
my whole conduct; yet something always prevented me from telling them
more about my new acquaintance than i had done on the first day we met.
i rejoiced in him, was proud of him, and soon could not live without
him; yet, though resolved every day to disclose the whole story of my
connection with him, i had it not in my power. something always
prevented me, till at length i thought no more of it, but resolved to
enjoy his fascinating company in private, and by all means to keep my
own with him. the resolution was vain: i set a bold face to it, but my
powers were inadequate to the task; my adherent, with all the suavity
imaginable, was sure to carry his point. i sometimes fumed, and
sometimes shed tears at being obliged to yield to proposals against
which i had at first felt every reasoning power of my soul rise in
opposition; but for all that he never faded in carrying conviction
along with him in effect, for he either forced me to acquiesce in his
measures, and assent to the truth of his positions, or he put me so
completely down that i had not a word left to advance against them.
after weeks, and i may say months of intimacy, i observed, somewhat to
my amazement, that we had never once prayed together; and, more than
that, that he had constantly led my attentions away from that duty,
causing me to neglect it wholly. i thought this a bad mark of a man
seemingly so much set on inculcating certain important points of
religion, and resolved next day to put him to the test, and request him
to perform that sacred duty in name of us both. he objected boldly;
saying there were very few people indeed with whom he could join in
prayer, and he made a point of never doing it, as he was sure they were
to ask many things of which he disapproved, and that, if he were to
officiate himself, he was as certain to allude to many things that came
not within the range of their faith. he disapproved of prayer
altogether in the manner it was generally gone about, he said. man made
it merely a selfish concern, and was constantly employed asking,
asking, for everything. whereas it became all god's creatures to be
content with their lot, and only to kneel before him in order to thank
him for such benefits as he saw meet to bestow. in short, he argued
with such energy that before we parted i acquiesced, as usual, in his
position, and never mentioned prayer to him any more.
having been so frequently seen in his company, several people happened
to mention the circumstance to my mother and reverend father; but at
the same time had all described him differently. at length, they began
to examine me with respect to the company i kept, as i absented myself
from home day after day. i told them i kept company only with one young
gentleman, whose whole manner of thinking on religious subjects i found
so congenial with my own that i could not live out of his society. my
mother began to lay down some of her old hackneyed rules of faith, but
i turned from hearing her with disgust; for, after the energy of my new
friend's reasoning, hers appeared so tame i could not endure it. and i
confess with shame that my reverend preceptor's religious dissertations
began, about this time, to lose their relish very much, and by degrees
became exceedingly tiresome to my ear. they were so inferior, in
strength and sublimity, to the most common observations of my young
friend that in drawing a comparison the former appeared as nothing. he,
however, examined me about many things relating to my companion, in all
of which i satisfied him, save in one: i could neither tell him who my
friend was, what was his name, nor of whom he was descended; and i
wondered at myself how i had never once adverted to such a thing for
all the time we had been intimate.
i inquired the next day what his name was; as i said i was often at a
loss for it, when talking with him. he replied that there was no
occasion for any one friend ever naming another, when their society was
held in private, as ours was; for his part he had never once named me
since we first met, and never intended to do so, unless by my own
request. "but if you cannot converse without naming me, you may call me
gil for the present," added he, "and if i think proper to take another
name at any future period, it shall be with your approbation."
"gil!" said i. "have you no name but gil? or which of your names is it?
your christian or surname?"
"oh, you must have a surname too, must you!" replied he. "very well,
you may call me gil-martin. it is not my christian name; but it is a
name which may serve your turn."
"this is very strange!" said i. "are you ashamed of your parents that
you refuse to give your real name?"
"i have no parents save one, whom i do not acknowledge," said he
proudly. "therefore, pray drop that subject, for it is a disagreeable
one. i am a being of a very peculiar temper, for, though i have
servants and subjects more than i can number, yet, to gratify a certain
whim, i have left them, and retired to this city, and, for all the
society it contains, you see i have attached myself only to you. this
is a secret, and i tell you only in friendship, therefore pray let it
remain one, and say not another word about the matter."
i assented, and said no more concerning it; for it instantly struck me
that this was no other than the czar peter of russia, having heard that
he had been travelling through europe in disguise, and i cannot say
that i had not thenceforward great and mighty hopes of high preferment,
as a defender and avenger of the oppressed christian church, under the
influence of this great potentate. he had hinted as much already, as
that it was more honourable, and of more avail to put down the wicked
with the sword than try to reform them, and i thought myself quite
justified in supposing that he intended me for some great employment,
that he had thus selected me for his companion out of all the rest in
scotland, and even pretended to learn the great truths of religion from
my mouth. from that time i felt disposed to yield to such a great
prince's suggestions without hesitation.
nothing ever astonished me so much as the uncommon powers with which he
seemed invested. in our walk one day, we met with a mr. blanchard, who
was reckoned a worthy, pious divine, but quite of the moral cast, who
joined us; and we three walked on, and rested together in the fields.
my companion did not seem to like him, but, nevertheless, regarded him
frequently with deep attention, and there were several times, while he
seemed contemplating him, and trying to find out his thoughts, that his
face became so like mr. blanchard's that it was impossible to have
distinguished the one from the other. the antipathy between the two was
mutual, and discovered itself quite palpably in a short time. when my
companion the prince was gone, mr. blanchard asked me anent him, and i
told him that he was a stranger in the city, but a very uncommon and
great personage. mr. blanchard's answer to me was as follows: "i never
saw anybody i disliked so much in my life, mr. robert; and if it be
true that he is a stranger here, which i doubt, believe me he is come
for no good."
"do you not perceive what mighty powers of mind he is possessed of?"
said i, "and also how clear and unhesitating he is on some of the most
interesting points of divinity?"
"it is for his great mental faculties that i dread him," said he. "it
is incalculable what evil such a person as he may do, if so disposed.
there is a sublimity in his ideas, with which there is to me a mixture
of terror; and, when he talks of religion, he does it as one that
rather dreads its truths than reverences them. he, indeed, pretends
great strictness of orthodoxy regarding some of the points of doctrine
embraced by the reformed church; but you do not seem to perceive that
both you and he are carrying these points to a dangerous extremity.
religion is a sublime and glorious thing, the bonds of society on
earth, and the connector of humanity with the divine nature; but there
is nothing so dangerous to man as the wresting of any of its
principles, or forcing them beyond their due bounds: this is of all
others the readiest way to destruction. neither is there anything so
easily done. there is not an error into which a man can fall which he
may not press scripture into his service as proof of the probity of,
and though your boasted theologian shunned the full discussion of the
subject before me, while you pressed it, i can easily see that both you
and he are carrying your ideas of absolute predestination, and its
concomitant appendages, to an extent that overthrows all religion and
revelation together; or, at least, jumbles them into a chaos, out of
which human capacity can never select what is good. believe me, mr.
robert, the less you associate with that illustrious stranger the
better, for it appears to me that your creed and his carries damnation
on the very front of it."
i was rather stunned at this; but pretended to smile with disdain, and
said it did not become youth to control age; and, as i knew our
principles differed fundamentally, it behoved us to drop the subject.
he, however, would not drop it, but took both my principles and me
fearfully to task, for blanchard was an eloquent and powerful-minded
old man; and, before we parted, i believe i promised to drop my new
acquaintance, and was all but resolved to do it.
as well might i have laid my account with shunning the light of day. he
was constant to me as my shadow, and by degrees he acquired such an
ascendency over me that i never was happy out of his company, nor
greatly so in it. when i repeated to him all that mr. blanchard had
said, his countenance kindled with indignation and rage; and then by
degrees his eyes sunk inward, his brow lowered, so that i was awed, and
withdrew my eyes from looking at him. a while afterwards as i was
addressing him, i chanced to look him again in the face, and the sight
of him made me start violently. he had made himself so like mr.
blanchard that i actually believed i had been addressing that
gentleman, and that i had done so in some absence of mind that i could
not account for. instead of being amused at the quandary i was in, he
seemed offended: indeed, he never was truly amused with anything. and
he then asked me sullenly, if i conceived such personages as he to have
no other endowments than common mortals?
i said i never conceived that princes or potentates had any greater
share of endowments than other men, and frequently not so much. he
shook his head, and bade me think over the subject again; and there was
an end of it. i certainly felt every day the more disposed to
acknowledge such a superiority in him; and, from all that i could
gather, i had now no doubt that he was peter of russia. everything
combined to warrant the supposition, and, of course, i resolved to act
in conformity with the discovery i had made.
for several days the subject of mr. blanchard's doubts and doctrines
formed the theme of our discourse. my friend deprecated them most
devoutly; and then again he would deplore them, and lament the great
evil that such a man might do among the human race. i joined with him
in allowing the evil in its fullest latitude; and, at length, after he
thought he had fully prepared my nature for such a trial of its powers
and abilities, he proposed calmly that we two should make away with mr.
blanchard. i was so shocked that my bosom became as it were a void, and
the beatings of my heart sounded loud and hollow in it; my breath cut,
and my tongue and palate became dry and speechless. he mocked at my
cowardice, and began a-reasoning on the matter with such powerful
eloquence that, before we parted, i felt fully convinced that it was my
bounden duty to slay mr. blanchard; but my will was far, very far from
consenting to the deed.
i spent the following night without sleep, or nearly so; and the next
morning, by the time the sun arose, i was again abroad, and in the
company of my illustrious friend. the same subject was resumed, and
again he reasoned to the following purport: that supposing me placed at
the head of any army of christian soldiers, all bent on putting down
the enemies of the church, would i have any hesitation in destroying
and rooting out these enemies? none, surely. well then, when i saw and
was convinced that here was an individual who was doing more detriment
to the church of christ on earth than tens of thousands of such
warriors were capable of doing, was it not my duty to cut him off, and
save the elect? "he who would be a champion in the cause of christ and
his church, my brave young friend," added he, "must begin early, and no
man can calculate to what an illustrious eminence small beginnings may
lead. if the man blanchard is worthy, he is only changing his situation
for a better one; and, if unworthy, it is better that one fall than
that a thousand souls perish. let us be up and doing in our vocations.
for me, my resolution is taken; i have but one great aim in this world,
and i never for a moment lose sight of it."
i was obliged to admit the force of his reasoning; for, though i cannot
from memory repeat his words, his eloquence was of that overpowering
nature that the subtilty of other men sunk before it; and there is also
little doubt that the assurance i had that these words were spoken by a
great potentate who could raise me to the highest eminence (provided
that i entered into his extensive and decisive measures) assisted
mightily in dispelling my youthful scruples and qualms of conscience;
and i thought moreover that, having such a powerful back friend to
support me, i hardly needed to be afraid of the consequences. i
consented! but begged a little time to think of it. he said the less
one thought of a duty the better; and we parted.
but the most singular instance of this wonderful man's power over my
mind was that he had as complete influence over me by night as by day.
all my dreams corresponded exactly with his suggestions; and, when he
was absent from me, still his arguments sunk deeper in my heart than
even when he was present. i dreamed that night of a great triumph
obtained, and, though the whole scene was but dimly and confusedly
defined in my vision, yet the overthrow and death of mr. blanchard was
the first step by which i attained the eminent station i occupied.
thus, by dreaming of the event by night, and discoursing of it by day,
it soon became so familiar to my mind that i almost conceived it as
done. it was resolved on: which was the first and greatest victory
gained; for there was no difficulty in finding opportunities enow of
cutting off a man who, every good day, was to be found walking by
himself in private grounds. i went and heard him preach for two days,
and in fact i held his tenets scarcely short of blasphemy; they were
such as i had never heard before, and his congregation, which was
numerous, were turning up their ears and drinking in his doctrines with
the utmost delight; for oh they suited their carnal natures and
self-sufficiency to a hair! he was actually holding it forth, as a
fact, that "it was every man's own blame if he was not saved!" what
horrible misconstruction! and then he was alleging, and trying to prove
from nature and reason, that no man ever was guilty of a sinful action
who might not have declined it had he so chosen! "wretched
controvertist!" thought i to myself an hundred times, "shall not the
sword of the lord be moved from its place of peace for such
presumptuous, absurd testimonies as these!"
when i began to tell the prince about these false doctrines, to my
astonishment i found that he had been in the church himself, and had
every argument that the old divine had used verbatim; and he remarked
on them with great concern that these were not the tenets that
corresponded with his views in society, and that he had agents in every
city, and every land, exerting their powers to put them down. i asked,
with great simplicity: "are all your subjects christians, prince?"
"all my european subjects are, or deem themselves so," returned he;
"and they are the most faithful and true subjects i have."
who could doubt, after this, that he was the czar of russia? i have
nevertheless had reasons to doubt of his identity since that period,
and which of my conjectures is right i believe the god of heaven only
knows, for i do not. i shall go on to write such things as i remember,
and, if anyone shall ever take the trouble to read over these
confessions, such a one will judge for himself. it will be observed
that, since ever i fell in with this extraordinary person, i have
written about him only, and i must continue to do so to the end of this
memoir, as i have performed no great or interesting action in which he
had not a principal share.
he came to me one day and said: "we must not linger thus in executing
what we have resolved on. we have much before our hands to perform for
the benefit of mankind, both civil as well as religious. let us do what
we have to do here, and then we must wend our way to other cities, and
perhaps to other countries. mr. blanchard is to hold forth in the high
church of paisley on sunday next, on some particularly great occasion:
this must be defeated; he must not go there. as he will be busy
arranging his discourses, we may expect him to be walking by himself in
finnieston dell the greater part of friday and saturday. let us go and
cut him off. what is the life of a man more than the life of a lamb, or
any guiltless animal? it is not half so much, especially when we
consider the immensity of the mischief this old fellow is working among
our fellow-creatures. can there be any doubt that it is the duty of one
consecrated to god to cut off such a mildew?"
"i fear me, great sovereign," said i, "that your ideas of retribution
are too sanguine, and too arbitrary for the laws of this country. i
dispute not that your motives are great and high; but have you debated
the consequences, and settled the result?"
"i have," returned be, "and hold myself amenable for the action to the
laws of god and of equity; as to the enactments of men, i despise them.
fain would i see the weapon of the lord of hosts begin the work of
vengeance that awaits it to do!"
i could not help thinking that i perceived a little derision of
countenance on his face as he said this, nevertheless i sunk dumb
before such a man, aroused myself to the task, seeing he would not have
it deferred. i approved of it in theory, but my spirit stood aloof from
the practice. i saw and was convinced that the elect of god would be
happier, and purer, were the wicked and unbelievers all cut off from
troubling and misleading them, but if it had not been the instigations
of this illustrious stranger, i should never have presumed to begin so
great a work myself. yet, though he often aroused my zeal to the
highest pitch, still my heart at times shrunk from the shedding of
life-blood, and it was only at the earnest and unceasing instigations
of my enlightened and voluntary patron that i at length put my hand to
the conclusive work. after i said all that i could say, and all had
been overborne (i remember my actions and words as well as it had been
yesterday), i turned round hesitatingly, and looked up to heaven for
direction; but there was a dimness come over my eyes that i could not
see. the appearance was as if there had been a veil drawn over me, so
nigh that i put up my hand to feel it; and then gil-martin (as this
great sovereign was pleased to have himself called) frowned, and asked
me what i was grasping at. i knew not what to say, but answered, with
fear and shame: "i have no weapons, not one; nor know i where any are
to be found."
"the god whom thou servest will provide these," said he, "if thou
provest worthy of the trust committed to thee."
i looked again up into the cloudy veil that covered us and thought i
beheld golden weapons of every description let down in it, but all with
their points towards me. i kneeled, and was going to stretch out my
hand to take one, when my patron seized me, as i thought, by the
clothes, and dragged me away with as much ease as i had been a lamb,
saying, with a joyful and elevated voice: "come, my friend, let us
depart: thou art dreaming—thou art dreaming. rouse up all the energies
of thy exalted mind, for thou art an highly favoured one; and doubt
thou not that he whom thou servest, will be ever at thy right and left
hand, to direct and assist thee."
these words, but particularly the vision i had seen, of the golden
weapons descending out of heaven, inflamed my zeal to that height that
i was as one beside himself; which my parents perceived that night, and
made some motions towards confining me to my room. i joined in the
family prayers, and then i afterwards sung a psalm and prayed by
myself; and i had good reasons for believing that that small oblation
of praise and prayer was not turned to sin. but there are strange
things, and unaccountable agencies in nature: he only who dwells
between the cherubim can unriddle them, and to him the honour must
redound for ever. amen.
i felt greatly strengthened and encouraged that night, and the next
morning i ran to meet my companion, out of whose eye i had now no life.
he rejoiced at seeing me so forward in the great work of reformation by
blood, and said many things to raise my hopes of future fame and glory;
and then producing two pistols of pure beaten gold, he held them out
and proffered me the choice of one, saying: "see what thy master hath
provided thee!" i took one of them eagerly, for i perceived at once
that they were two of the very weapons that were let down from heaven
in the cloudy veil, the dim tapestry of the firmament; and i said to
myself. "surely this is the will of the lord."
the little splendid and enchanting piece was so perfect, so complete,
and so ready for executing the will of the donor, that i now longed to
use it in his service. i loaded it with my own hand, as gil-martin did
the other, and we took our stations behind a bush of hawthorn and
bramble on the verge of the wood, and almost close to the walk. my
patron was so acute in all his calculations that he never mistook an
event. we had not taken our stand above a minute and a half till old
mr. blanchard appeared, coming slowly on the path. when we saw this, we
cowered down and leaned each of us a knee upon the ground, pointing
the pistols through the bush, with an aim so steady that it was
impossible to miss our victim.
he came deliberately on, pausing at times so long that we dreaded he
was going to turn. gil-martin dreaded it, and i said i did, but wished
in my heart that he might. he, however, came onward, and i will never
forget the manner in which he came! no, i don't believe i ever can
forget it, either in the narrow bounds of time or the ages of eternity!
he was a broadly, ill-shaped man, of a rude exterior, and a little bent
with age; his hands were clasped behind his back and below his coat,
and he walked with a slow swinging air that was very peculiar. when he
paused and looked abroad on nature, the act was highly impressive: he
seemed conscious of being all alone, and conversant only with god and
the elements of his creation. never was there such a picture of human
inadvertency! a man approaching step by step to the one that was to
hurl him out of one existence into another with as much ease and
indifference as the ox goeth to the stall. hideous vision, wilt thou
not be gone from my mental sight! if not, let me bear with thee as i
can!
when he came straight opposite to the muzzles of our pieces, gil-martin
called out "eh!" with a short quick sound. the old man, without
starting, turned his face and breast towards us, and looked into the
wood, but looked over our heads.
"now!" whispered my companion, and fired. but my hand refused the
office, for i was not at that moment sure about becoming an assassin in
the cause of christ and his church. i thought i heard a sweet voice
behind me, whispering to me to beware, and i was going to look round,
when my companion exclaimed: "coward, we are ruined!"
i had no time for an alternative: gil-martin's ball had not taken
effect, which was altogether wonderful, as the old man's breast was
within a few yards of him. "hilloa!" cried blanchard, "what is that
for, you dog!" and with that he came forward to look over the bush. i
hesitated, as i said, and attempted to look behind me; but there was no
time: the next step discovered two assassins lying in covert, waiting
for blood. "coward, we are ruined!" cried my indignant friend; and that
moment my piece was discharged. the effect was as might have been
expected: the old man first stumbled to one side, and then fell on his
back. we kept our places, and i perceived my companion's eyes gleaming
with an unnatural joy. the wounded man raised himself from the bank to
a sitting posture, and i beheld his eyes swimming; he however appeared
sensible, for we heard him saying in a low and rattling voice: "alas,
alas! whom have i offended, that they should have been driven to an act
like this! come forth and shew yourselves, that i may either forgive
you before i die, or curse you in the name of the lord." he then fell
a-groping with both hands on the ground, as if feeling for something he
had lost manifestly in the agonies of death; and, with a solemn and
interrupted prayer for forgiveness, he breathed his last.
i had become rigid as a statue, whereas my associate appeared to be
elevated above measure. "arise, thou faint-hearted one, and let us be
going," said he. "thou hast done well for once; but wherefore hesitate
in such a cause? this is but a small beginning of so great a work as
that of purging the christian world. but the first victim is a worthy
one, and more of such lights must be extinguished immediately."
we touched not our victim, nor anything pertaining to him, for fear of
staining our hands with his blood; and the firing having brought three
men within view, who were hasting towards the spot, my undaunted
companion took both the pistols, and went forward as with intent to
meet them, bidding me shift for myself. i ran off in a contrary
direction, till i came to the foot of the pearman sike, and then,
running up the hollow of that, i appeared on the top of the bank as if
i had been another man brought in view by hearing the shots in such a
place. i had a full view of a part of what passed, though not of all. i
saw my companion going straight to meet the men, apparently with a
pistol in every hand, waving in a careless manner. they seemed not
quite clear of meeting with him, and so he went straight on, and passed
between them. they looked after him, and came onwards; but, when they
came to the old man lying stretched in his blood, then they turned and
pursued my companion, though not so quickly as they might have done;
and i understand that from the first they saw no more of him.
great was the confusion that day in glasgow. the most popular of all
their preachers of morality was (what they called) murdered in cold
blood, and a strict and extensive search was made for the assassin.
neither of the accomplices was found, however, that is certain, nor was
either of them so much as suspected; but another man was apprehended
under circumstances that warranted suspicion. this was one of the
things that i witnessed in my life, which i never understood, and it
surely was one of my patron's most dexterous tricks, for i must still
say, what i have thought from the beginning, that like him there never
was a man created. the young man who was taken up was a preacher; and
it was proved that he had purchased fire-arms in town, and gone out
with them that morning. but the far greatest mystery of the whole was
that two of the men, out of the three who met my companion, swore that
that unfortunate preacher was the man whom they met with a pistol in
each hand, fresh from the death of the old divine. the poor fellow made
a confused speech himself, which there is not the least doubt was quite
true; but it was laughed to scorn, and an expression of horror ran
through both the hearers and jury. i heard the whole trial, and so did
gil-martin; but we left the journeyman preacher to his fate, and from
that time forth i have had no faith in the justice of criminal trials.
if once a man is prejudiced on one side, he will swear anything in
support of such prejudice. i tried to expostulate with my mysterious
friend on the horrid injustice of suffering this young man to die for
our act, but the prince exulted in it more than the other, and said the
latter was the most dangerous man of the two.
the alarm in and about glasgow was prodigious. the country being
divided into two political parties, the court and the country party,
the former held meetings, issued proclamations, and offered rewards,
ascribing all to the violence of party spirit, and deprecating the
infernal measures of their opponents. i did not understand their
political differences; but it was easy to see that the true gospel
preachers joined all on one side, and the upholders of pure morality
and a blameless life on the other, so that this division proved a test
to us, and it was forthwith resolved that we two should pick out some
of the leading men of this unsaintly and heterodox cabal, and cut them
off one by one, as occasion should suit.
now, the ice being broke, i felt considerable zeal in our great work,
but pretended much more; and we might soon have kidnapped them all
through the ingenuity of my patron, had not our next attempt
miscarried, by some awkwardness or mistake of mine. the consequence was
that he was discovered fairly, and very nigh seized. i also was seen,
and suspected so far that my reverend father, my mother, and myself
were examined privately. i denied all knowledge of the matter; and they
held it in such a ridiculous light, and their conviction of the
complete groundlessness of the suspicion was so perfect, that their
testimony prevailed, and the affair was hushed. i was obliged, however,
to walk circumspectly, and saw my companion the prince very seldom, who
was prowling about every day, quite unconcerned about his safety. he
was every day a new man, however, and needed not to be alarmed at any
danger; for such a facility had he in disguising himself that, if it
had not been for a password which we had between us, for the purposes
of recognition, i never could have known him myself.
it so happened that my reverend father was called to edinburgh about
this time, to assist with his counsel in settling the national affairs.
at my earnest request i was permitted to accompany him, at which both
my associate and i rejoiced, as we were now about to move in a new and
extensive field. all this time i never knew where my illustrious friend
resided. he never once invited me to call on him at his lodgings, nor
did he ever come to our house, which made me sometimes to suspect that,
if any of our great efforts in the cause of true religion were
discovered, he intended leaving me in the lurch. consequently, when we
met in edinburgh (for we travelled not in company), i proposed to go
with him to look for lodgings, telling him at the same time what a
blessed religious family my reverend instructor and i were settled in.
he said he rejoiced at it, but he made a rule of never lodging in any
particular house, but took these daily, or hourly, as he found it
convenient, and that he never was at a loss in any circumstance.
"what a mighty trouble you put yourself to, great sovereign!" said i,
"and all, it would appear, for the purpose of seeing and knowing more
and more of the human race."
"i never go but where i have some great purpose to serve," returned he,
"either in the advancement of my own power and dominion or in thwarting
my enemies."
"with all due deference to your great comprehension, my illustrious
friend," said i, "it strikes me that you can accomplish very little
either the one way or the other here, in the humble and private
capacity you are pleased to occupy."
"it is your own innate modesty that prompts such a remark," said he.
"do you think the gaining of you to my service is not an attainment
worthy of being envied by the greatest potentate in christendom? before
i had missed such a prize as the attainment of your services, i would
have travelled over one half of the habitable globe."—i bowed with
great humility, but at the same time how could i but feel proud and
highly flattered? he continued: "believe me, my dear friend, for such a
prize i account no effort too high. for a man who is not only dedicated
to the king of heaven in the most solemn manner, soul, body, and
spirit, but also chosen of him from the beginning, justified,
sanctified, and received into a communion that never shall be broken,
and from which no act of his shall ever remove him—the possession of
such a man, i tell you, is worth kingdoms; because, every deed that he
performs, he does it with perfect safety to himself and honour to
me."—i bowed again, lifting my hat, and he went on.— "i am now going
to put his courage in the cause he has espoused to a severe test—to a
trial at which common nature would revolt, but he who is dedicated to
be the sword of the lord must raise himself above common humanity. you
have a father and a brother according to the flesh: what do you know of
them?"
"i am sorry to say i know nothing good," said i. "they are reprobates,
castaways, beings devoted to the wicked one, and, like him, workers of
every species of iniquity with greediness."
"they must both fall!" said he, with a sigh and melancholy look. "it is
decreed in the councils above that they must both fall by your hand."
"the god of heaven forbid it!" said i. "they are enemies to christ and
his church, that i know and believe; but they shall live and die in
their iniquity for me, and reap their guerdon when their time cometh.
there my hand shall not strike."
"the feeling is natural, and amiable," said he. "but you must think
again. whether are the bonds of carnal nature or the bonds and vows of
the lord strongest?"
"i will not reason with you on this head, mighty potentate," said i,
"for whenever i do so it is but to be put down. i shall only, express
my determination not to take vengeance out of the lord's hand in this
instance. it availeth not. these are men that have the mark of the
beast in their foreheads and right hands; they are lost beings
themselves, but have no influence over others. let them perish in their
sins; for they shall not be meddled with by me."
"how preposterously you talk, my dear friend!" said he. "these people
are your greatest enemies; they would rejoice to see you annihilated.
and, now that you have taken up the lord's cause of being avenged on
his enemies, wherefore spare those that are your own as well as his?
besides, you ought to consider what great advantages would be derived
to the cause of righteousness and truth were the estate and riches of
that opulent house in your possession, rather than in that of such as
oppose the truth and all manner of holiness."
this was a portion of the consequence of following my illustrious
adviser's summary mode of procedure that had never entered into my
calculation. i disclaimed all idea of being influenced by it; however,
i cannot but say that the desire of being enabled to do so much good,
by the possession of these bad men's riches, made some impression on my
heart, and i said i would consider of the matter. i did consider it,
and that right seriously as well as frequently; and there was scarcely
an hour in the day on which my resolves were not animated by my great
friend, till at length i began to have a longing desire to kill my
brother, in particular. should any man ever read this scroll, he will
wonder at this confession, and deem it savage and unnatural. so it
appeared to me at first, but a constant thinking of an event changes
every one of its features. i have done all for the best, and as i was
prompted, by one who knew right and wrong much better than i did. i had
a desire to slay him, it is true, and such a desire too as a thirsty
man has to drink; but, at the same time, this longing desire was
mingled with a certain terror, as if i had dreaded that the drink for
which i longed was mixed with deadly poison. my mind was so much
weakened, or rather softened about this time, that my faith began a
little to give way, and i doubted most presumptuously of the least
tangible of all christian tenets, namely, of the infallibility of the
elect. i hardly comprehended the great work i had begun, and doubted of
my own infallibility, or that of any created being. but i was brought
over again by the unwearied diligence of my friend to repent of my
backsliding, and view once more the superiority of the almighty's
counsels in its fullest latitude. amen.
i prayed very much in secret about this time, and that with great
fervour of spirit, as well as humility; and my satisfaction at finding
all my requests granted is not to be expressed.
my illustrious friend still continuing to sound in my ears the
imperious duty to which i was called, of making away with my sinful
relations, and quoting many parallel actions out of the scriptures, and
the writings of the holy fathers, of the pleasure the lord took in such
as executed his vengeance on the wicked, i was obliged to acquiesce in
his measures, though with certain limitations. it was not easy to
answer his arguments, and yet i was afraid that he soon perceived a
leaning to his will on my part. "if the acts of jehu, in rooting out
the whole house of his master, were ordered and approved-of by the
lord," said he, "would it not have been more praiseworthy if one of
ahab's own sons had stood up for the cause of the god of israel, and
rooted out the sinners and their idols out of the land?"
"it would certainly," said i. "to our duty to god all other duties must
yield."
"go thou then and do likewise," said he. "thou are called to a high
vocation; to cleanse the sanctuary of thy god in this thy native land
by the shedding of blood; go thou then like a ruling energy, a master
spirit of desolation in the dwellings of the wicked, and high shall be
your reward both here and hereafter."
my heart now panted with eagerness to look my brother in the face. on
which my companion, who was never out of the way, conducted me to a
small square in the suburbs of the city, where there were a number of
young noblemen and gentlemen playing at a vain, idle, and sinful game,
at which there was much of the language of the accursed going on; and
among these blasphemers he instantly pointed out my brother to me. i
was fired with indignation at seeing him in such company, and so
employed; and i placed myself close beside him to watch all his
motions, listen to his words, and draw inferences from what i saw and
heard. in what a sink of sin was he wallowing! i resolved to take him
to task, and, if he refused to be admonished, to inflict on him some
condign punishment; and, knowing that my illustrious friend and
director was looking on, i resolved to show some spirit. accordingly, i
waited until i heard him profane his maker's name three times, and
then, my spiritual indignation being roused above all restraint, i went
up and kicked him. yes, i went boldly up and struck him with my foot,
and meant to have given him a more severe blow than it was my fortune
to inflict. it had, however, the effect of rousing up his corrupt
nature to quarrelling and strife, instead of taking the chastisement of
the lord in humility and meekness. he ran furiously against me in the
choler that is always inspired by the wicked one; but i overthrew him,
by reason of impeding the natural and rapid progress of his unholy feet
running to destruction. i also fell slightly; but his fall proved a
severe one, he arose in wrath, and struck me with the mall which he
held in his hand, until my blood flowed copiously; and from that moment
i vowed his destruction in my heart. but i chanced to have no weapon at
that time, nor any means of inflicting due punishment on the caitiff,
which would not have been returned double on my head by him and his
graceless associates. i mixed among them at the suggestion of my
friend, and, following them to their den of voluptuousness and sin, i
strove to be admitted among them, in hopes of finding some means of
accomplishing my great purpose, while i found myself moved by the
spirit within me so to do. but i was not only debarred, but, by the
machinations of my wicked brother and his associates, cast into prison.
i was not sorry at being thus honoured to suffer in the cause of
righteousness, and at the hands of sinful men; and, as soon as i was
alone, i betook myself to prayer, deprecating the long-suffering of god
towards such horrid sinners. my jailer came to me, and insulted me. he
was a rude unprincipled fellow, partaking of the loose and carnal
manners of the age; but i remembered of having read, in the cloud of
witnesses, of such men formerly having been converted by the imprisoned
saints; so i set myself, with all my heart, to bring about this man's
repentance and reformation.
"fat the deil are ye yoolling an' praying that gate for, man?" said he,
coming angrily in. "i thought the days o' praying prisoners had been a'
ower. we hath rowth o' them aince; an' they were the poorest an' the
blackest bargains that ever poor jailers saw. gie up your crooning, or
i'll pit you to an in-by place, where ye sall get plenty o't."
"friend," said i, "i am making my appeal at the bar where all human
actions are seen and judged, and where you shall not be forgot, sinful
as you are. go in peace, and let me be."
"hae ye naebody nearer-hand hame to mak your appeal to, man?" said he.
"because an ye hae-na, i dread you an' me may be unco weel acquaintit
by an' by."
i then opened up the mysteries of religion to him in a clear and
perspicuous manner, but particularly the great doctrine of the election
of grace; and then i added: "now, friend, you must tell me if you
pertain to this chosen number. it is in every man's power to ascertain
this, and it is every man's duty to do it."
"an' fat the better wad you be for the kenning o' this, man?" said he.
"because, if you are one of my brethren, i will take you into sweet
communion and fellowship," returned i. "but, if you belong to the
unregenerate, i have a commission to slay you."
"the deil you hae, callant!" said he, gaping and laughing. "an', pray
now, fa was it, that gae you siccan a braw commission?"
"my commission is sealed by the signet above," said i, "and that i will
let you and all sinners know. i am dedicated to it by the most solemn
vows and engagements. i am the sword of the lord, and famine and
pestilence are my sisters. woe then to the wicked of this land, for
they must fall down dead together, that the church may be purified!"
"oo, foo, foo! i see how it is," said he. "yours is a very braw
commission, but you will have the small opportunity of carrying it
through here. take my advising, and write a bit of a letter to your
friends, and i will send it, for this is no place for such a great man.
if you cannot steady your hand to write, as i see you have been at your
great work, a word of a mouth may do; for i do assure you this is not
the place at all, of any in the world, for your operations."
the man apparently thought i was deranged in my intellect. he could not
swallow such great truths at the first morsel. so i took his advice,
and sent a line to my reverend father, who was not long in coming, and
great was the jailer's wonderment when he saw all the great christian
noblemen of the land sign my bond of freedom.
my reverend father took this matter greatly to heart, and bestirred
himself in the good cause till the transgressors were ashamed to shew
their faces. my illustrious companion was not idle: i wondered that he
came not to me in prison, nor at my release; but he was better
employed, in stirring up the just to the execution of god's decrees;
and he succeeded so well that my brother and all his associates had
nearly fallen victims to their wrath. but many were wounded, bruised,
and imprisoned, and much commotion prevailed in the city. for my part,
i was greatly strengthened in my resolution by the anathemas of my
reverend father, who, privately (that is in a family capacity) in his
prayers, gave up my father and brother, according to the flesh, to
satan, making it plain to all my senses of perception that they were
being given up of god, to be devoured by fiends of men, at their will
and pleasure, and that whosoever should slay them would do god good
service.
the next morning my illustrious friend met me at an early hour, and he
was greatly overjoyed at hearing my sentiments now chime so much in
unison with his own. i said: "i longed for the day and the hour that i
might look my brother in the face at gilgal, and visit on him the
iniquity of his father and himself, for that i was now strengthened and
prepared for the deed."
"i have been watching the steps and movements of the profligate one,"
said he, "and, lo, i will take you straight to his presence. let your
heart be as the heart of the lion, and your arms strong as the shekels
of brass, and swift to avenge as the bolt that descendeth from heaven,
for the blood of the just and the good hath long flowed in scotland.
but already is the day of their avengement begun; the hero is at length
arisen who shall send all such as bear enmity to the true church, or
trust in works of their own, to tophet!"
thus encouraged, i followed my friend, who led me directly to the same
court in which i had chastised the miscreant on the foregoing day; and,
behold, there was the same group again assembled. they eyed me with
terror in their looks, as i walked among them and eyed them with looks
of disapprobation and rebuke; and i saw that the very eye of a chosen
one lifted on these children of belial was sufficient to dismay and put
them to flight. i walked aside to my friend, who stood at a distance
looking on, and he said to me: "what thinkest thou now?" and i answered
in the words of the venal prophet, "lo, now, if i had a sword into mine
hand i would even kill him."
"wherefore lackest thou it?" said he. "dost thou not see that they
tremble at thy presence, knowing that the avenger of blood is among
them."
my heart was lifted up on hearing this, and again i strode into the
midst of them, and, eyeing them with threatening looks, they were so
much confounded that they abandoned their sinful pastime, and fled
everyone to his house!
this was a palpable victory gained over the wicked, and i thereby knew
that the hand of the lord was with me. my companion also exulted, and
said: "did not i tell thee? behold thou dost not know one half of thy
might, or of the great things thou art destined to do. come with me and
i will show thee more than this, for these young men cannot subsist
without the exercises of sin. i listened to their councils, and i know
where they will meet again."
accordingly he led me a little farther to the south, and we walked
aside till by degrees we saw some people begin to assemble; and in a
short time we perceived the same group stripping off their clothes to
make them more expert in the practice of madness and folly. their game
was begun before we approached, and so also were the oaths and cursing.
i put my hands in my pockets, and walked with dignity and energy into
the midst of them. it was enough. terror and astonishment seized them.
a few of them cried out against me, but their voices were soon hushed
amid the murmurs of fear. one of them, in the name of the rest, then
came and besought of me to grant them liberty to amuse themselves; but
i refused peremptorily, dared the whole multitude so much as to touch
me with one of their fingers, and dismissed them in the name of the
lord.
again they all fled and dispersed at my eye, and i went home in
triumph, escorted by my friend, and some well-meaning young christians,
who, however, had not learned to deport themselves with soberness and
humility. but my ascendancy over my enemies was great indeed; for
wherever i appeared i was hailed with approbation, and, wherever my
guilty brother made his appearance, he was hooted and held in derision,
till he was forced to hide his disgraceful head, and appear no more in
public.
immediately after this i was seized with a strange distemper, which
neither my friends nor physicians could comprehend, and it confined me
to my chamber for many days; but i knew, myself, that i was bewitched,
and suspected my father's reputed concubine of the deed. i told my
fears to my reverend protector, who hesitated concerning them, but i
knew by his words and looks that he was conscious i was right. i
generally conceived myself to be two people. when i lay in bed, i
deemed there were two of us in it; when i sat up i always beheld
another person, and always in the same position from the place where i
sat or stood, which was about three paces off me towards my left side.
it mattered not how many or how few were present: this my second self
was sure to be present in his place, and this occasioned a confusion in
all my words and ideas that utterly astounded my friends, who all
declared that, instead of being deranged in my intellect, they had
never heard my conversation manifest so much energy or sublimity of
conception; but, for all that, over the singular delusion that i was
two persons my reasoning faculties had no power. the most perverse part
of it was that i rarely conceived myself to be any of the two persons.
i thought for the most part that my companion was one of them, and my
brother the other; and i found that, to be obliged to speak and answer
in the character of another man, was a most awkward business at the
long run.
who can doubt, from this statement, that i was bewitched, and that my
relatives were at the ground of it? the constant and unnatural
persuasion that i was my brother proved it to my own satisfaction, and
must, i think, do so to every unprejudiced person. this victory of the
wicked one over me kept me confined in my chamber at mr. millar's house
for nearly a month, until the prayers of the faithful prevailed, and i
was restored. i knew it was a chastisement for my pride, because my
heart was lifted up at my superiority over the enemies of the church;
nevertheless i determined to make short work with the aggressor, that
the righteous might not be subjected to the effect of his diabolical
arts again.
i say i was confined a month. i beg he that readeth to take note of
this, that he may estimate how much the word, or even the oath, of a
wicked man is to depend on. for a month i saw no one but such as came
into my room, and, for all that, it will be seen that there were plenty
of the same set to attest upon oath that i saw my brother every day
during this period; that i persecuted him, with my presence day and
night, while all the time i never saw his face save in a delusive
dream. i cannot comprehend what manoeuvres my illustrious friend was
playing off with them about this time; for he, having the art of
personating whom he chose, had peradventure deceived them, else many of
them had never all attested the same thing. i never saw any man so
steady in his friendships and attentions as he; but as he made a rule
of never calling at private houses, for fear of some discovery being
made of his person, so i never saw him while my malady lasted; but, as
soon as i grew better, i knew i had nothing ado but to attend at some
of our places of meeting to see him again. he was punctual, as usual,
and i had not to wait.
my reception was precisely as i apprehended. there was no flaring, no
flummery, nor bombastical pretensions, but a dignified return to my
obeisance, and an immediate recurrence, in converse, to the important
duties incumbent on us, in our stations, as reformers and purifiers of
the church.
"i have marked out a number of most dangerous characters in this city,"
said he, "all of whom must be cut off from cumbering the true vineyard
before we leave this land. and, if you bestir not yourself in the work
to which you are called, i must raise up others who shall have the
honour of it!"
"i am, most illustrious prince, wholly at your service," said i. "show
but what ought to be done, and here is the heart to dare and the hand
to execute. you pointed out my relations, according to the flesh, as
brands fitted to be thrown into the burning. i approve peremptorily of
the award; nay, i thirst to accomplish it; for i myself have suffered
severely from their diabolical arts. when once that trial of my
devotion to the faith is accomplished, then be your future operations
disclosed."
"you are free of your words and promises," said he.
"so will i be of my deeds in the service of my master, and that shalt
thou see," said i. "i lack not the spirit, nor the will, but i lack
experience woefully; and, because of that shortcoming, must bow to your
suggestions!"
"meet me here to-morrow betimes," said he, "and perhaps you may hear of
some opportunity of displaying your zeal in the cause of righteousness."
i met him as he desired me; and he addressed me with a hurried and
joyful expression, telling me that my brother was astir, and that a few
minutes ago he had seen him pass on his way to the mountain. "the hill
is wrapped in a cloud," added he, "and never was there such an
opportunity of executing divine justice on a guilty sinner. you may
trace him in the dew, and shall infallibly find him on the top of some
precipice; for it is only in secret that he dares show his debased head
to the sun."
"i have no arms, else assuredly i would pursue him and discomfit him,"
said i.
"here is a small dagger," said he; "i have nothing of weaponkind about
me save that, but it is a potent one; and, should you require it, there
is nothing more ready or sure."
"will not you accompany me?" said i. "sure you will?"
"i will be with you, or near you," said he. "go you on before."
i hurried away as he directed me, and imprudently asked some of
queensberry's guards if such and such a young man passed by them going
out from the city. i was answered in the affirmative, and till then had
doubted of my friend's intelligence, it was so inconsistent with a
profligate's life to be so early astir. when i got the certain
intelligence that my brother was before me, i fell a-running, scarcely
knowing what i did; and, looking several times behind me, i perceived
nothing of my zealous and arbitrary friend. the consequence of this was
that, by the time i reached st. anthony's well, my resolution began to
give way. it was not my courage, for, now that i had once shed blood in
the cause of the true faith, i was exceedingly bold and ardent, but,
whenever i was left to myself, i was subject to sinful doubtings. these
always hankered on one point. i doubted if the elect were infallible,
and if the scripture promises to them were binding in all situations
and relations. i confess this, and that it was a sinful and shameful
weakness in me, but my nature was subject to it, and i could not eschew
it. i never doubted that i was one of the elect myself; for, besides
the strong inward and spiritual conviction that i possessed, i had my
kind father's assurance; and these had been revealed to him in that way
and measure that they could not be doubted.
in this desponding state, i sat myself down on a stone, and bethought
me of the rashness of my undertaking. i tried to ascertain, to my own
satisfaction, whether or not i really had been commissioned of god to
perpetrate these crimes in his behalf, for, in the eyes and by the laws
of men, they were great and crying transgressions. while i sat
pondering on these things, i was involved in a veil of white misty
vapour, and, looking up to heaven, i was just about to ask direction
from above, when i heard as it were a still small voice close by me,
which uttered some words of derision and chiding. i looked intensely in
the direction whence it seemed to come, and perceived a lady robed in
white, who hastened towards me. she regarded me with a severity of look
and gesture that appalled me so much i could not address her; but she
waited not for that, but coming close to my side said, without
stopping: "preposterous wretch! how dare you lift your eyes to heaven
with such purposes in your heart? escape homewards, and save your soul,
or farewell for ever!"
these were all the words that she uttered, as far as i could ever
recollect, but my spirits were kept in such a tumult that morning that
something might have escaped me. i followed her eagerly with my eyes,
but in a moment she glided over the rocks above the holy well, and
vanished. i persuaded myself that i had seen a vision, and that the
radiant being that had addressed me was one of the good angels, or
guardian spirits, commissioned by the almighty to watch over the steps
of the just. my first impulse was to follow her advice, and make my
escape home; for i thought to myself. "how is this interested and
mysterious foreigner a proper judge of the actions of a free christian?"
the thought was hardly framed, nor had i moved in a retrograde
direction six steps, when i saw my illustrious friend and great adviser
descending the ridge towards me with hasty and impassioned strides. my
heart fainted within me; and, when he came up and addressed me, i
looked as one caught in a trespass. "what hath detained thee, thou
desponding trifler?" said he. "verily now shall the golden opportunity
be lost which may never be recalled. i have traced the reprobate to his
sanctuary in the cloud, and lo he is perched on the pinnacle of a
precipice an hundred fathoms high. one ketch with thy foot, or toss
with thy finger, shall throw him from thy sight into the foldings of
the cloud, and he shall be no more seen till found at the bottom of the
cliff dashed to pieces. make haste, therefore, thou loiterer, if thou
wouldst ever prosper and rise to eminence in the work of thy lord and
master."
"i go no farther in this work," said i, "for i have seen a vision that
has reprimanded the deed!'
"a vision?" said he. "was it that wench who descended from the hill?"
"the being that spake to me, and warned me of my danger, was indeed in
the form of a lady," said i.
"she also approached me and said a few words," returned he, "and i
thought there was something mysterious in her manner. pray, what did
she say? for the words of such a singular message, and from such a
messenger, ought to be attended to. if i understood her aright, she was
chiding us for our misbelief and preposterous delay."
i recited her words, but he answered that i had been in a state of
sinful doubting at the time, and it was to these doubtings she had
adverted. in short, this wonderful and clear-sighted stranger soon
banished all my doubts and despondency, making me utterly ashamed of
them, and again i set out with him in the pursuit of my brother. he
showed me the traces of his footsteps in the dew, and pointed out the
spot where i should find him. "you have nothing more to do than go
softly down behind him," said he, "which you can do to within an ell of
him, without being seen; then rush upon him, and throw him from his
seat, where there is neither footing nor hold. i will go, meanwhile,
and amuse his sight by some exhibition in the contrary direction, and
he shall neither know nor perceive who had done him this kind office:
for, exclusive of more weighty concerns, be assured of this that, the
sooner he falls, the fewer crimes will he have to answer for, and his
estate in the other world will be proportionally more tolerable than if
he spent a long unregenerate life steeped in iniquity to the loathing
of the soul."
"nothing can be more plain or more pertinent," said i. "therefore, i
fly to perform that which is both a duty towards god and towards man!"
"you shall yet rise to great honour and preferment," said he.
"i value it not, provided i do honour and justice to the cause of my
master here," said i.
"you shall be lord of your father's riches and demesnes," added he.
"i disclaim and deride every selfish motive thereto relating," said i,
"further than as it enables me to do good."
"aye, but that is a great and a heavenly consideration, that longing
for ability to do good," said he—and, as he said so, i could not help
remarking a certain derisive exultation of expression which i could not
comprehend; and indeed i have noted this very often in my illustrious
friend, and sometimes mentioned it civilly to him, but he has never
failed to disclaim it. on this occasion i said nothing, but, concealing
his poniard in my clothes, i hasted up the mountain, determined to
execute my purpose before any misgivings should again visit me; and i
never had more ado than in keeping firm my resolution. i could not help
my thoughts, and there are certain trains and classes of thoughts that
have great power in enervating the mind. i thought of the awful thing
of plunging a fellow creature from the top of a cliff into the dark and
misty void below—of his being dashed to pieces on the protruding
rocks, and of hearing his shrieks as he descended the cloud, and beheld
the shagged points on which he was to alight. then i thought of
plunging a soul so abruptly into hell, or, at the best, sending it to
hover on the confines of that burning abyss—of its appearance at the
bar of the almighty to receive its sentence. and then i thought: "will
there not be a sentence pronounced against me there, by a jury of the
just made perfect, and written down in the registers of heaven?"
these thoughts, i say, came upon me unasked, and, instead of being able
to dispel them, they mustered upon the summit of my imagination in
thicker and stronger array: and there was another that impressed me in
a very particular manner, though i have reason to believe not so
strongly as those above written. it was this: "what if i should fail in
my first effort? will the consequence not be that i am tumbled from the
top of the rock myself?" and then all the feelings anticipated, with
regard to both body and soul, must happen to me! this was a
spinebreaking reflection; and yet, though the probability was rather on
that side, my zeal in the cause of godliness was such that it carried
me on, maugre all danger and dismay.
i soon came close upon my brother, sitting on the dizzy pinnacle, with
his eyes fixed steadfastly in the direction opposite to me. i descended
the little green ravine behind him with my feet foremost, and every now
and then raised my head, and watched his motions. his posture continued
the same, until at last i came so near him i could have heard him
breathe if his face had been towards me. i laid my cap aside, and made
me ready to spring upon him and push him over. i could not for my life
accomplish it! i do not think it was that i durst not, i have always
felt my courage equal to anything in a good cause. but i had not the
heart, or something that i ought to have had. in short, it was not done
in time, as it easily might have been. these thoughts are hard enemies
wherewith to combat! and i was so grieved that i could not effect my
righteous purpose that i laid me down on my face and shed tears. then,
again, i thought of what my great enlightened friend and patron would
say to me, and again my resolution rose indignant and indissoluble save
by blood. i arose on my right knee and left foot, and had just begun to
advance the latter forward: the next step my great purpose had been
accomplished, and the culprit had suffered the punishment due to his
crimes. but what moved him i knew not: in the critical moment he sprung
to his feet, and, dashing himself furiously against me, he overthrew
me, at the imminent peril of my life. i disencumbered myself by main
force and fled, but he overhied me, knocked me down, and threatened,
with dreadful oaths, to throw me from the cliff. after i was a little
recovered from the stunning blow, i aroused myself to the combat; and,
though i do not recollect the circumstances of that deadly scuffle very
minutely, i know that i vanquished him so far as to force him to ask my
pardon, and crave a reconciliation. i spurned at both and left him to
the chastisements of his own wicked and corrupt heart.
my friend met me again on the hill and derided me in a haughty and
stern manner for my imbecility and want of decision. i told him how
nearly i had effected my purpose, and excused myself as well as i was
able. on this, seeing me bleeding, he advised me to swear the peace
against my brother, and have him punished in the meantime, he being the
first aggressor. i promised compliance and we parted, for i was
somewhat ashamed of my failure, and was glad to be quit for the present
of one of whom i stood so much in awe.
when my reverend father beheld me bleeding a second time by the hand of
a brother, he was moved to the highest point of displeasure; and,
relying on his high interest and the justice of his cause, he brought
the matter at once before the courts. my brother and i were first
examined face to face. his declaration was a mere romance: mine was not
the truth; but as it was by the advice of my reverend father, and that
of my illustrious friend, both of whom i knew to be sincere christians
and true believers, that i gave it, i conceived myself completely
justified on that score. i said i had gone up into the mountain early
on the morning to pray, and had withdrawn myself, for entire privacy,
into a little sequestered dell—had laid aside my cap, and was in the
act of kneeling when i was rudely attacked by my brother, knocked over,
and nearly slain. they asked my brother if this was true. he
acknowledged that it was; that i was bare-headed and in the act of
kneeling when he ran foul of me without any intent of doing so. but the
judge took him to task on the improbability of this, and put the
profligate sore out of countenance. the rest of his tale told still
worse, insomuch that he was laughed at by all present, for the judge
remarked to him that, granting it was true that he had at first run
against me on an open mountain and overthrown me by accident, how was
it that, after i had extricated myself and fled, that he had pursued,
overtaken, and knocked me down a second time? would he pretend that all
that was likewise by chance? the culprit had nothing to say for himself
on this head, and i shall not forget my exultation and that of my
reverend father when the sentence of the judge was delivered. it was
that my wicked brother should be thrown into prison and tried on a
criminal charge of assault and battery, with the intent of committing
murder. this was a just and righteous judge, and saw things in their
proper bearings, that is, he could discern between a righteous and a
wicked man, and then there could be no doubt as to which of the two
were acting right and which wrong.
had i not been sensible that a justified person could do nothing wrong,
i should not have been at my ease concerning the statement i had been
induced to give on this occasion. i could easily perceive that, by
rooting out the weeds from the garden of the church, i heightened the
growth of righteousness; but, as to the tardy way of giving false
evidence on matters of such doubtful issue, i confess i saw no great
propriety in it from the beginning. but i now only moved by the will
and mandate of my illustrious friend. i had no peace or comfort when
out of his sight, nor have i ever been able to boast of much in his
presence; so true is it that a christian's life is one of suffering.
my time was now much occupied, along with my reverend preceptor, in
making ready for the approaching trial, as the prosecutors. our counsel
assured us of a complete victory, and that banishment would be the
mildest award of the law on the offender. mark how different was the
result! from the shifts and ambiguities of a wicked bench, who had a
fellow-feeling of iniquity with the defenders, my suit was lost, the
graceless libertine was absolved, and i was incarcerated, and bound
over to keep the peace, with heavy penalties, before i was set at
liberty.
i was exceedingly disgusted at this issue, and blamed the counsel of my
friend to his face. he expressed great grief, and expatiated on the
wickedness of our judicatories, adding: "i see i cannot depend on you
for quick and summary measures, but for your sake i shall be revenged
on that wicked judge, and that you shall see in a few days." the lord
justice clerk died that same week! but he died in his own house and his
own bed, and by what means my friend effected it i do not know. he
would not tell me a single word of the matter, but the judge's sudden
death made a great noise, and i made so many curious inquiries
regarding the particulars of it that some suspicions were like to
attach to our family of some unfair means used. for my part i know
nothing, and rather think he died by the visitation of heaven, and that
my friend had foreseen it, by symptoms, and soothed me by promises of
complete revenge.
it was some days before he mentioned my brother's meditated death to me
again, and certainly he then found me exasperated against him
personally to the highest degree. but i told him that i could not now
think any more of it owing to the late judgment of the court, by which,
if my brother were missing or found dead, i would not only forfeit my
life but my friends would be ruined by the penalties.
"i suppose you know and believe in the perfect safety of your soul,"
said he, "and that that is a matter settled from the beginning of time,
and now sealed and ratified both in heaven and earth?"
"i believe in it thoroughly and perfectly," said i; "and, whenever i
entertain doubts of it, i am sensible of sin and weakness."
"very well, so then am i," said he. "i think i can now divine, with all
manner of certainty, what will be the high and merited guerdon of your
immortal part. hear me then further: i give you my solemn assurance,
and bond of blood, that no human hand shall ever henceforth be able to
injure your life, or shed one drop of your precious blood; but it is on
the condition that you walk always by my directions."
"i will do so with cheerfulness," said i, "for, without your
enlightened counsel, i feel that i can do nothing. but, as to your
power of protecting my life, you must excuse me for doubting of it.
nay, were we in your proper dominions, you could not ensure that."
"in whatever dominion or land i am, my power accompanies me," said he,
"and it is only against human might and human weapon that i ensure your
life; on that will i keep an eye, and on that you may depend. i have
never broken word or promise with you. do you credit me?"
"yes, i do," said i, "for i see you are in earnest. i believe, though i
do not comprehend you."
"then why do you not at once challenge your brother to the field of
honour? seeing you now act without danger, cannot you also act without
fear?"
"it is not fear," returned i, "believe me. i hardly know what fear is.
it is a doubt that, on all these emergencies, constantly haunts my mind
that, in performing such and such actions, i may fall from my upright
state. this makes fratricide a fearful task!"
"this is imbecility itself," said he. "we have settled and agreed on
that point an hundred times. i would therefore advise that you
challenge your brother to single combat. i shall ensure your safety,
and he cannot refuse giving you satisfaction."
"but then the penalties?" said i.
"we will try to evade these," said he, "and, supposing you should be
caught, if once you are laird of dalcastle and balgrennan, what are the
penalties to you?"
"might we not rather pop him off in private and quietness, as we did
the deistical divine?" said i.
"the deed would be alike meritorious, either way," said he. "but may we
not wait for years before we find an opportunity? my advice is to
challenge him, as privately as you will, and there cut him off."
"so be it then," said i. "when the moon is at the full, i will send for
him forth to speak with one, and there will i smite him and slay him,
and he shall trouble the righteous no more."
"then this is the very night," said he, "the moon is nigh to the full,
and this night your brother and his sinful mates hold carousal; for
there is an intended journey to-morrow. the exulting profligate leaves
town, where we must remain till the time of my departure hence; and
then is he safe, and must live to dishonour god, and not only destroy
his own soul but those of many others. alack, and woe is me! the sins
that he and his friends will commit this very night will cry to heaven
against us for our shameful delay! when shall our great work of
cleansing the sanctuary be finished, if we proceed at this puny rate?"
"i see the deed must be done, then," said i, "and, since it is so, it
shall be done. i will arm myself forthwith, and from the midst of his
wine and debauchery you shall call him forth to me, and there will i
smite him with the edge of the sword, that our great work be not
retarded."
"if thy execution were equal to thy intent, how great a man you soon
might be!" said he. "we shall make the attempt once more; and, if it
fail again, why, i must use other means to bring about my high purposes
relating to mankind. home and make ready. i will go and procure what
information i can regarding their motions, and will meet you in
disguise twenty minutes hence, at the first turn of hewie's lane beyond
the loch."
"i have nothing to make ready," said i, "for i do not choose to go
home. bring me a sword, and we may consecrate it with prayer and vows,
and, if i use it not to the bringing down of the wicked and profane,
then may the lord do so to me, and more also!"
we parted, and there was i left again to the multiplicity of my own
thoughts for the space of twenty minutes, a thing my friend never
failed in subjecting me to, and these were worse to contend with than
hosts of sinful men. i prayed inwardly that these deeds of mine might
never be brought to the knowledge of men who were incapable of
appreciating the high motives that led to them; and then i sung part of
the th psalm, likewise in spirit; but, for all these efforts, my
sinful doubts returned, so that when my illustrious friend joined me,
and proffered me the choice of two gilded rapiers, i declined accepting
any of them, and began, in a very bold and energetic manner, to express
my doubts regarding the justification of all the deeds of perfect men.
he chided me severely and branded me with cowardice, a thing that my
nature never was subject to; and then he branded me with falsehood and
breach of the most solemn engagements both to god and man.
i was compelled to take the rapier, much against my inclination; but,
for all the arguments, threats, and promises that he could use, i would
not consent to send a challenge to my brother by his mouth. there was
one argument only that he made use of which had some weight with me,
but yet it would not preponderate. he told me my brother was gone to a
notorious and scandalous habitation of women, and that, if i left him
to himself for ever so short a space longer, it might embitter his
state through ages to come. this was a trying concern to me; but i
resisted it, and reverted to my doubts. on this he said that he had
meant to do me honour, but, since i put it out of his power, he would
do the deed, and take the responsibility on himself. "i have with sore
travail procured a guardship of your life," added he. "for my own, i
have not; but, be that as it will, i shall not be baffled in my
attempts to benefit my friends without a trial. you will at all events
accompany me, and see that i get justice?"
"certes, i will do thus much," said i, "and woe be to him if his arm
prevail against my friend and patron!"
his lip curled with a smile of contempt, which i could hardly brook;
and i began to be afraid that the eminence to which i had been destined
by him was already fading from my view. and i thought what i should
then do to ingratiate myself again with him, for without his
countenance i had no life. "i will be a man in act," thought i, "but in
sentiment i will not yield, and for this he must surely admire me the
more."
as we emerged from the shadowy lane into the fair moonshine, i started
so that my whole frame underwent the most chilling vibrations of
surprise. i again thought i had been taken at unawares and was
conversing with another person. my friend was equipped in the highland
garb, and so completely translated into another being that, save by his
speech, all the senses of mankind could not have recognized him. i
blessed myself, and asked whom it was his pleasure to personify
to-night? he answered me carelessly that it was a spark whom he meant
should bear the blame of whatever might fall out to-night; and that was
all that passed on the subject.
we proceeded by some stone steps at the foot of the north loch, in hot
argument all the way. i was afraid that our conversation might be
overheard, for the night was calm and almost as light as day, and we
saw sundry people crossing us as we advanced. but the zeal of my friend
was so high that he disregarded all danger, and continued to argue
fiercely and loudly on my delinquency, as he was pleased to call it. i
stood on one argument alone, which was that "i did not think the
scripture promises to the elect, taken in their utmost latitude,
warranted the assurance that they could do no wrong; and that,
therefore, it behoved every man to look well to his steps."
there was no religious scruple that irritated my enlightened friend and
master so much as this. he could not endure it. and, the sentiments of
our great covenanted reformers being on his side, there is not a doubt
that i was wrong. he lost all patience on hearing what i advanced on
this matter, and, taking hold of me, he led me into a darksome booth in
a confined entry; and, after a friendly but cutting reproach, he bade
me remain there in secret and watch the event. "and, if i fall," said
he, "you will not fail to avenge my death?"
i was so entirely overcome with vexation that i could make no answer,
on which he left me abruptly, a prey to despair; and i saw or heard no
more till he came down to the moonlight green followed by my brother.
they had quarrelled before they came within my hearing, for the first
words i heard were those of my brother, who was in a state of
intoxication, and he was urging a reconciliation, as was his wont on
such occasions. my friend spurned at the suggestion, and dared him to
the combat; and after a good deal of boastful altercation, which the
turmoil of my spirits prevented me from remembering, my brother was
compelled to draw his sword and stand on the defensive. it was a
desperate and terrible engagement. i at first thought that the royal
stranger and great champion of the faith would overcome his opponent
with ease, for i considered heaven as on his side, and nothing but the
arm of sinful flesh against him. but i was deceived. the sinner stood
firm as a rock, while the assailant flitted about like a shadow, or
rather like a spirit. i smiled inwardly, conceiving that these
lightsome manoeuvres were all a sham to show off his art and mastership
in the exercise, and that, whenever they came to close fairly, that
instant my brother would be overcome. still i was deceived. my
brother's arm seemed invincible, so that the closer they fought the
more palpably did it prevail. they fought round the green to the very
edge of the water, and so round till they came close up to the covert
where i stood. there being no more room to shift ground, my brother
then forced him to come to close quarters, on which, the former still
having the decided advantage, my friend quitted his sword and called
out. i could resist no longer; so, springing from my concealment, i
rushed between them with my sword drawn, and parted them as if they had
been two schoolboys: then, turning to my brother, i addressed him as
follows: "wretch! miscreant! knowest thou what thou art attempting?
wouldest thou lay thine hand on the lord's anointed, or shed his
precious blood? turn thee to me, that i may chastise thee for all thy
wickedness, and not for the many injuries thou hast done to me!" to it
we went, with full thirst of vengeance on every side. the duel was
fierce; but the might of heaven prevailed, and not my might. the
ungodly and reprobate young man fell covered with wounds, and with
curses and blasphemy in his mouth, while i escaped uninjured. thereto
his power extended not.
i will not deny that my own immediate impressions of this affair in
some degree differed from this statement. but this is precisely as my
illustrious friend described it to be afterwards, and i can rely
implicitly on his information, as he was at that time a looker-on, and
my senses all in a state of agitation, and he could have no motive for
saying what was not the positive truth.
never till my brother was down did we perceive that there had been
witnesses to the whole business. our ears were then astounded by rude
challenges of unfair play, which were quite appalling to me; but my
friend laughed at them and conducted me off in perfect safety. as to
the unfairness of the transaction, i can say thus much, that my royal
friend's sword was down ere ever mine was presented. but if it still be
accounted unfair to take up a conqueror, and punish him in his own way,
i answer: that if a man is sent on a positive mission by his master,
and hath laid himself under vows to do his work, he ought not to be too
nice in the means of accomplishing it; and, further, i appeal to holy
writ, wherein many instances are recorded of the pleasure the lord
takes in the final extinction of the wicked and profane; and this
position i take to be unanswerable.
i was greatly disturbed in my mind for many days, knowing that the
transaction had been witnessed, and sensible also of the perilous
situation i occupied, owing to the late judgment of the court against
me. but on the contrary, i never saw my enlightened friend in such high
spirits. he assured me there was no danger; and again repeated that he
warranted my life against the power of man. i thought proper, however,
to remain in hiding for a week; but, as he said, to my utter amazement,
the blame fell on another, who was not only accused but pronounced
guilty by the general voice, and outlawed for non-appearance! how could
i doubt, after this, that the hand of heaven was aiding and abetting
me? the matter was beyond my comprehension; and, as for my friend, he
never explained anything that was past, but his activity and art were
without a parallel.
he enjoyed our success mightily; and for his sake i enjoyed it
somewhat, but it was on account of his comfort only, for i could not
for my life perceive in what degree the church was better or purer than
before these deeds were done. he continued to flatter me with great
things, as to honours, fame and emolument; and, above all, with the
blessing and protection of him to whom my body and soul were dedicated.
but, after these high promises, i got no longer peace; for he began to
urge the death of my father with such an unremitting earnestness that i
found i had nothing for it but to comply. i did so; and cannot express
his enthusiasm of approbation. so much did he hurry and press me in
this that i was forced to devise some of the most openly violent
measures, having no alternative. heaven spared me the deed, taking, in
that instance, the vengeance in its own hand; for, before my arm could
effect the sanguine but meritorious act, the old man followed his son
to the grave. my illustrious and zealous friend seemed to regret this
somewhat, but he comforted himself with the reflection, that still i
had the merit of it, having not only consented to it, but in fact
effected it, for by doing the one action i had brought about both.
no sooner were the obsequies of the funeral over than my friend and i
went to dalcastle, and took undisputed possession of the houses, lands
and effects that had been my father's; but his plate, and vast
treasures of ready money, he had bestowed on a voluptuous and unworthy
creature, who had lived long with him as a mistress. fain would i have
sent her after her lover, and gave my friend some hints on the
occasion; but he only shook his head, and said that we must lay all
selfish and interested motives out of the question.
for a long time, when i awaked in the morning, i could not believe my
senses, that i was indeed the undisputed and sole proprietor of so much
wealth and grandeur; and i felt so much gratified that i immediately
set about doing all the good i was able, hoping to meet with all
approbation and encouragement from my friend. i was mistaken. he
checked the very first impulses towards such a procedure, questioned my
motives, and uniformly made them out to be wrong. there was one morning
that a servant said to me there was a lady in the back chamber who
wanted to speak with me, but he could not tell me who it was, for all
the old servants had left the mansion, every one on hearing of the
death of the late laird, and those who had come knew none of the people
in the neighbourhood. from several circumstances, i had suspicions of
private confabulations with women, and refused to go to her, but bid
the servant inquire what she wanted. she would not tell, she could only
state the circumstances to me; so i, being sensible that a little
dignity of manner became me in my elevated situation, returned for
answer that, if it was business that could not be transacted by my
steward, it must remain untransacted. the answer which the servant
brought back was of a threatening nature. she stated she must see me,
and, if i refused her satisfaction there, she would compel it where i
should not evite her.
my friend and director appeared pleased with my dilemma, and rather
advised that i should hear what the woman had to say; on which i
consented, provided she would deliver her mission in his presence. she
came with manifest signs of anger and indignation, and began with a
bold and direct charge against me of a shameful assault on one of her
daughters; of having used the basest of means in order to lead her
aside from the paths of rectitude; and, on the failure of these, of
having resorted to the most unqualified measures.
i denied the charge in all its bearings, assuring the dame that i had
never so much as seen either of her daughters to my knowledge, far less
wronged them; on which she got into great wrath, and abused me to my
face as an accomplished vagabond, hypocrite, and sensualist; and she
went so far as to tell me roundly that if i did not marry her daughter,
she would bring me to the gallows and that in a very short time.
"marry your daughter, honest woman!" said i, "on the faith of a
christian, i never saw your daughter; and you may rest assured in this,
that i will neither marry you nor her. do you consider how short a time
i have been in this place? how much that time has been occupied? and
how there was even a possibility that i could have accomplished such
villainies?"
"and how long does your christian reverence suppose you have remained
in this place since the late laird's death?" said she.
"that is too well known to need recapitulation," said i. "only a very
few days, though i cannot at present specify the exact number; perhaps
from thirty to forty, or so. but in all that time, certes, i have never
seen either you or any of your two daughters that you talk of. you must
be quite sensible of that."
my friend shook his head three times during this short sentence, while
the woman held up her hands in amazement and disgust, exclaiming:
"there goes the self-righteous one! there goes the consecrated youth,
who cannot err! you, sir, know, and the world shall know, of the faith
that is in this most just, devout, and religious miscreant! can you
deny that you have already been in this place four months and seven
days? or that in that time you have been forbid my house twenty times?
or that you have persevered in your endeavours to effect the basest and
most ungenerous of purposes? or that you have attained them? hypocrite
and deceiver as you are! yes, sir; i say, dare you deny that you have
attained your vile, selfish, and degrading purposes towards a young,
innocent, and unsuspecting creature, and thereby ruined a poor widow's
only hope in this world? no, you cannot look in my face, and deny aught
of this."
"the woman is raving mad!" said i. "you, illustrious sir, know that, in
the first instance, i have not yet been in this place one month." my
friend shook his head again, and answered me: "you are wrong, my dear
friend; you are wrong. it is indeed the space of time that the lady
hath stated, to a day, since you came here, and i came with you; and i
am sorry that i know for certain that you have been frequently haunting
her house, and have often had private correspondence with one of the
young ladies, too. of the nature of it i presume not to know."
"you are mocking me," said i. "but as well may you try to reason me out
of my existence as to convince me that i have been here even one month,
or that any of those things you allege against me has the shadow of
truth or evidence to support it. i will swear to you, by the great god
that made me; and by—"
"hold, thou most abandoned profligate!" cried she violently, "and do
not add perjury to your other detestable crimes. do not, for mercy's
sake, any more profane that name whose attributes you have wrested and
disgraced. but tell me what reparation you propose offering to my
injured child."
"i again declare, before heaven, woman, that, to the best of my
knowledge and recollection, i never saw your daughter. i now think i
have some faint recollection of having seen your face, but where, or in
what place, puzzles me quite."
"and, why?" said she. "because for months and days you have been, in
such a state of extreme inebriety, that your time has gone over like a
dream that has been forgotten. i believe that, from the day you came
first to my house, you have been in a state of utter delirium, and that
principally from the fumes of wine and ardent spirits."
"it is a manifest falsehood!" said i. "i have never, since i entered on
the possession of dalcastle, tasted wine or spirits, saving once a few
evenings ago; and, i confess to my shame, that i was led too far; but i
have craved forgiveness and obtained it. i take my noble and
distinguished friend there for a witness to the truth of what i assert;
a man who has done more, and sacrificed more for the sake of genuine
christianity than any this world contains. him you will believe."
"i hope you have attained forgiveness," said he, seriously. "indeed it
would be next to blasphemy to doubt it. but, of late, you have been
very much addicted to intemperance. i doubt if, from the first night
you tasted the delights of drunkenness, that you have ever again been
in your right mind until monday last. doubtless you have been for a
good while most diligent in your addresses to this lady's daughter."
"this is unaccountable," said i. "it is impossible that i can have been
doing a thing and not doing it at the same time. but indeed, honest
woman, there have several incidents occurred to me in the course of my
life which persuade me i have a second self; or that there is some
other being who appears in my likeness."
here my friend interrupted me with a sneer, and a hint that i was
talking insanely; and then he added, turning to the lady: "i know my
friend mr. colwan will do what is just and, right. go and bring the
young lady to him, that he may see her, and he will then recollect all
his former amours with her!'
"i humbly beg your pardon, sir," said i. "but the mention of such a
thing as amours with any woman existing, to me, is really so absurd, so
far from my principles, so from the purity of nature and frame to which
i was born and consecrated, that i hold it as an insult, and regard it
with contempt."
i would have said more in reprobation of such an idea, had not my
servant entered, and said that a gentleman wanted to see me on
business. being glad of an opportunity of getting quit of my lady
visitor, i ordered the servant to show him in; and forthwith a little
lean gentleman, with a long aquiline nose, and a bald head, daubed all
over with powder and pomatum, entered. i thought i recollected having
seen him too, but could not remember his name, though he spoke to me
with the greatest familiarity; at least, that sort of familiarity that
an official person generally assumes. he bustled about and about,
speaking to everyone, but declined listening for a single moment to
any. the lady offered to withdraw, but he stopped her.
"no, no, mrs. keeler, you need not go; you need not go; you must not
go, madam. the business i came about concerns you—yes, that it does.
bad business yon of walker's? eh? could not help it—did all i could,
mr. wringhim. done your business. have it all cut and dry here, sir.
no, this is not it—have it among them, though.—i'm at a little loss
for your name, sir (addressing my friend)—seen you very often,
though—exceedingly often—quite well acquainted with you."
"no, sir, you are not," said my friend, sternly. the intruder never
regarded him; never so much as lifted his eyes from his bundle of law
papers, among which he was bustling with great hurry and importance,
but went on:
"impossible! have seen a face very like it, then—what did you say your
name was, sir?—very like it indeed. is it not the young laird who was
murdered whom you resemble so much?"
here mrs. keeler uttered a scream, which so much startled me that it
seems i grew pale, and, on looking at my friend's face, there was
something struck me so forcibly in the likeness between him and my late
brother that i had very nearly fainted. the woman exclaimed that it was
my brother's spirit that stood beside me.
"impossible!" exclaimed the attorney. "at least, i hope not, else his
signature is not worth a pin. there is some balance due on yon
business, madam. do you wish your account? because i have it here,
ready discharged, and it does not suit letting such things lie over.
this business of mr. colwan's will be a severe one on you,
madam—rather a severe one."
"what business of mine, if it be your will, sir," said i. "for my part
i never engaged you in business of any sort less or more." he never
regarded me, but went on: "you may appeal, though. yes, yes, there are
such things as appeals for the refractory. here it is, gentlemen. here
they are all together. here is, in the first place, sir, your power of
attorney, regularly warranted, sealed, and signed with your own hand."
"i declare solemnly that i never signed that document," said i.
"aye, aye, the system of denial is not a bad one in general," said my
attorney. "but at present there is no occasion for it. you do not deny
your own hand?"
"i deny everything connected with the business," cried i. "i disclaim
it in toto, and declare that i know no more about it than the child
unborn."
"that is exceedingly good!" exclaimed he. "i like your pertinacity
vastly! i have three of your letters, and three of your signatures;
that part is all settled, and i hope so is the whole affair; for here
is the original grant to your father, which he has never thought proper
to put in requisition. simple gentleman! but here have i, lawyer
linkum, in one hundredth part of the time that any other notary,
writer, attorney, or writer of the signet in britain would have done
it, procured the signature of his majesty's commissioner, and thereby
confirmed the charter to you and your house, sir, for ever and
ever—begging your pardon, madam." the lady, as well as myself, tried
several times to interrupt the loquacity of linkum, but in vain: he
only raised his hand with a quick flourish, and went on:
"here it is:
james, by the grace of god, king of great britain, france, and ireland,
to his right trusty cousin, sendeth greeting: and whereas his right
leal and trust-worthy cousin, george colwan, of dalcastle and
balgrennan, hath suffered great losses, and undergone much hardship, on
behalf of his majesty's rights and titles; he therefore, for himself,
and as prince and steward of scotland, and by the consent of his right
trusty cousins and councillors hereby grants to the said george colwan,
his heirs and assignees whatsomever, heritably and irrevocably, all and
haill the lands and others underwritten: to wit, all and haill, the
five merk land of kipplerig; the five pound land of easter knockward,
with all the towers, fortalices, manor-places, houses, biggings, yards,
orchards, tofts, crofts, mills, woods, fishings, mosses, muirs,
meadows, commonties, pasturages, coals, coal-heughs, tennants,
tenantries, services of free tenants, annexes, connexes, dependencies,
parts, pendicles, and pertinents of the same whatsomever; to be
peaceably brooked, joysed, set, used, and disposed of by him and his
aboves, as specified, heritably and irrevocably, in all time coming:
and, in testimony thereof, his majesty, for himself, and as prince
steward of scotland, with the advice and consent of his foresaids,
knowledge, proper motive, and kingly power, makes, erects, creates,
unites, annexes, and incorporates, the whole lands above mentioned in a
haill and free barony, by all the rights, miethes, and marches thereof,
old and divided, as the same lies, in length and breadth, in houses,
biggings, mills, multures, hawking, bunting, fishing; with court,
plaint, herezeld, fock, fork, sack, sock, thole, thame, vert, wraik,
waith, wair, venison, outfang thief, infang thief, pit and gallows, and
all and sundry other commodities. given at our court of whitehall, &c.,
&c. god save the king.
compositio  lib. ..
registrate th september .
"see, madam, here are ten signatures of privy councillors of that year,
and here are other ten of the present year, with his grace the duke of
queensberry at the head. all right. see here it is, sir—all
right—done your work. so you see, madam, this gentleman is the true
and sole heritor of all the land that your father possesses, with all
the rents thereof for the last twenty years, and upwards. fine job for
my employers! sorry on your account, madam—can't help it."
i was again going to disclaim all interest or connection in the matter
but my friend stopped me; and the plaints and lamentations of the dame
became so overpowering that they put an end to all further colloquy;
but lawyer linkum followed me, and stated his great outlay, and the
important services he had rendered me, until i was obliged to subscribe
an order to him for l on my banker.
i was now glad to retire with my friend, and ask seriously for some
explanation of all this. it was in the highest degree unsatisfactory.
he confirmed all that had been stated to me; assuring me that i had not
only been assiduous in my endeavours to seduce a young lady of great
beauty, which it seemed i had effected, but that i had taken counsel,
and got this supposed, old, false, and forged grant raked up and now
signed, to ruin the young lady's family quite, so as to throw her
entirely on myself for protection, and be wholly at my will.
this was to me wholly incomprehensible. i could have freely made oath
to the contrary of every particular. yet the evidences were against me,
and of a nature not to be denied. here i must confess that, highly as i
disapproved of the love of women, and all intimacies and connections
with the sex, i felt a sort of indefinite pleasure, an ungracious
delight in having a beautiful woman solely at my disposal. but i
thought of her spiritual good in the meantime. my friend spoke of my
backslidings with concern; requesting me to make sure of my
forgiveness, and to forsake them; and then he added some words of sweet
comfort. but from this time forth i began to be sick at times of my
existence. i had heart-burnings, longings, and, yearnings that would
not be satisfied; and i seemed hardly to be an accountable creature;
being thus in the habit of executing transactions of the utmost moment
without being sensible that i did them. i was a being incomprehensible
to myself. either i had a second self, who transacted business in my
likeness, or else my body was at times possessed by a spirit over which
it had no control, and of whose actions my own soul was wholly
unconscious. this was an anomaly not to be accounted for by any
philosophy of mine, and i was many times, in contemplating it, excited
to terrors and mental torments hardly describable. to be in a state of
consciousness and unconsciousness, at the same time, in the same body
and same spirit, was impossible. i was under the greatest anxiety,
dreading some change would take place momently in my nature; for of
dates i could make nothing: one-half, or two-thirds of my time, seemed
to me totally lost. i often, about this time, prayed with great
fervour, and lamented my hopeless condition, especially in being liable
to the commission of crimes which i was not sensible of and could not
eschew. and i confess, notwithstanding the promises on which i had been
taught to rely, i began to have secret terrors that the great enemy of
man's salvation was exercising powers over me that might eventually
lead to my ruin. these were but temporary and sinful fears, but they
added greatly to my unhappiness.
the worst thing of all was what hitherto i had never felt, and, as yet,
durst not confess to myself, that the presence of my illustrious and
devoted friend was becoming irksome to me. when i was by myself, i
breathed freer, and my step was lighter; but, when he approached, a
pang went to my heart, and, in his company, i moved and acted as if
under a load that i could hardly endure. what a state to be in! and yet
to shake him off was impossible—we were incorporated
together—identified with one another, as it were, and the power was
not in me to separate myself from him. i still knew nothing who he was,
further than that he was a potentate of some foreign land, bent on
establishing some pure and genuine doctrines of christianity, hitherto
only half understood, and less than half exercised. of this i could
have no doubts after all that he had said, done and suffered in the
cause. but, alongst with this, i was also certain that he was possessed
of some supernatural power, of the source of which i was wholly
ignorant. that a man could be a christian and at the same time a
powerful necromancer, appeared inconsistent, and adverse to every
principle taught in our church and from this i was led to believe that
he inherited his powers from on high, for i could not doubt either of
the soundness of his principles or that he accomplished things
impossible to account for. thus was i sojourning in the midst of a
chaos of confusion. i looked back on my by-past life with pain, as one
looks back on a perilous journey, in which he has attained his end,
without gaining any advantage either to himself or others; and i looked
forward, as on a darksome waste, full of repulsive and terrific shapes,
pitfalls, and precipices, to which there was no definite bourn, and
from which i turned with disgust. with my riches, my unhappiness was
increased tenfold; and here, with another great acquisition of
property, for which i had pleaed, and which i had gained in a dream, my
miseries and difficulties were increasing. my principal feeling, about
this time, was an insatiable longing for something that i cannot
describe or denominate properly, unless i say it was for utter oblivion
that i longed. i desired to sleep; but it was for a deeper and longer
sleep than that in which the senses were nightly steeped. i longed to
be at rest and quiet, and close my eyes on the past and the future
alike, as far as this frail life was concerned. but what had been
formerly and finally settled in the councils above, i presumed not to
call in question.
in this state of irritation and misery was i dragging on an existence,
disgusted with all around me, and in particular with my mother, who,
with all her love and anxiety, had such an insufferable mode of
manifesting them that she had by this time rendered herself exceedingly
obnoxious to me. the very sound of her voice at a distance went to my
heart like an arrow, and made all my nerves to shrink; and, as for the
beautiful young lady for whom they told me i had been so much
enamoured, i shunned all intercourse with her or hers, as i would have
done with the devil. i read some of their letters and burnt them, but
refused to see either the young lady or her mother on any account.
about this time it was that my worthy and reverend parent came with one
of his elders to see my mother and myself. his presence always brought
joy with it into our family, for my mother was uplifted, and i had so
few who cared for me, or for whom i cared, that i felt rather gratified
at seeing him. my illustrious friend was also much more attached to him
than any other person (except myself) for their religious principles
tallied in every point, and their conversation was interesting,
serious, and sublime. being anxious to entertain well and highly the
man to whom i had been so much indebted, and knowing that, with all his
integrity and righteousness, he disdained not the good things of this
life, i brought from the late laird's well-stored cellars various
fragrant and salubrious wines, and we drank, and became merry, and i
found that my miseries and overpowering calamities passed away over my
head like a shower that is driven by the wind. i became elevated and
happy, and welcomed my guests an hundred times; and then i joined them
in religious conversation, with a zeal and enthusiasm which i had not
often experienced, and which made all their hearts rejoice, so that i
said to myself. "surely every gift of god is a blessing, and ought to
be used with liberality and thankfulness."
the next day i waked from a profound and feverish sleep, and called for
something to drink. there was a servant answered whom i had never seen
before, and he was clad in my servant's clothes and livery. i asked for
andrew handyside, the servant who had waited at table the night before;
but the man answered with a stare and a smile:
"what do you mean, sirrah," said i. "pray what do you here? or what are
you pleased to laugh at? i desire you to go about your business, and
send me up handyside. i want him to bring me something to drink."
"ye sanna want a drink, maister," said the fellow. "tak a hearty ane,
and see if it will wauken ye up something, sae that ye dinna ca' for
ghaists through your sleep. surely ye haena forgotten that andrew
handyside has been in his grave these six months?"
this was a stunning blow to me. i could not answer further, but sunk
back on my pillow as if i had been a lump of lead, refusing to take a
drink or anything else at the fellow's hand, who seemed thus mocking me
with so grave a face. the man seemed sorry, and grieved at my being
offended, but i ordered him away, and continued sullen and thoughtful.
could i have again been for a season in utter oblivion to myself, and
transacting business which i neither approved of nor had any connection
with! i tried to recollect something in which i might have been
engaged, but nothing was portrayed on my mind subsequent to the parting
with my friends at a late hour the evening before. the evening before
it certainly was: but, if so, how came it that andrew handyside, who
served at table that evening, should have been in his grave six months!
this was a circumstance somewhat equivocal; therefore, being afraid to
arise lest accusations of i know not what might come against me, i was
obliged to call once more in order to come at what intelligence i
could. the same fellow appeared to receive my orders as before, and i
set about examining him with regard to particulars. he told me his name
was scrape; that i hired him myself; of whom i hired him; and at whose
recommendation. i smiled, and nodded so as to let the knave see i
understood he was telling me a chain of falsehoods, but did not choose
to begin with any violent asseverations to the contrary.
"and where is my noble friend and companion?" said i. "how has he been
engaged in the interim?"
"i dinna ken him, sir," said scrape, "but have heard it said that the
strange mysterious person that attended you, him that the maist part of
folks countit uncanny, had gane awa wi' a mr. ringan o' glasko last
year, and had never returned."
i thanked the lord in my heart for this intelligence, hoping that the
illustrious stranger had returned to his own land and people, and that
i should thenceforth be rid of his controlling and appalling presence.
"and where is my mother?" said, i. the man's breath cut short, and he
looked at me without returning any answer.—"i ask you where my mother
is?" said i.
"god only knows, and not i, where she is," returned he. "he knows where
her soul is, and, as for her body, if you dinna ken something o' it, i
suppose nae man alive does."
"what do you mean, you knave?" said i. "what dark hints are these you
are throwing out? tell me precisely and distinctly what you know of my
mother?"
"it is unco queer o' ye to forget, or pretend to forget everything that
gate the day, sir," said he. "i'm sure you heard enough about it
yestreen; an' i can tell you there are some gayan ill-faurd stories
gaun about that business. but, as the thing is to be tried afore the
circuit lords, it wad be far wrang to say either this or that to
influence the public mind; it is best just to let justice tak its swee.
i hae naething to say, sir. ye hae been a good enough maister to me,
and paid my wages regularly, but ye hae muckle need to be innocent, for
there are some heavy accusations rising against you."
"i fear no accusations of man," said i, "as long as i can justify my
cause in the sight of heaven; and that i can do this i am well aware.
go you and bring me some wine and water, and some other clothes than
these gaudy and glaring ones."
i took a cup of wine and water; put on my black clothes and walked out.
for all the perplexity that surrounded me, i felt my spirits
considerably buoyant. it appeared that i was rid of the two greatest
bars to my happiness, by what agency i knew not. my mother, it seemed,
was gone, who had become a grievous thorn in my side of late; and my
great companion and counsellor, who tyrannized over every spontaneous
movement of my heart, had likewise taken himself off. this last was an
unspeakable relief; for i found that for a long season i had only been
able to act by the motions of his mysterious mind and spirit. i
therefore thanked god for my deliverance, and strode through my woods
with a daring and heroic step; with independence in my eye, and freedom
swinging in my right hand.
at the extremity of the colwan wood, i perceived a figure approaching
me with slow and dignified motion. the moment that i beheld it, my
whole frame received a shock as if the ground on which i walked had
sunk suddenly below me. yet, at that moment, i knew not who it was; it
was the air and motion of someone that i dreaded, and from whom i would
gladly have escaped; but this i even had not power to attempt. it came
slowly onward, and i advanced as slowly to meet it; yet, when we came
within speech, i still knew not who it was. it bore the figure, air,
and features of my late brother, i thought, exactly; yet in all these
there were traits so forbidding, so mixed with an appearance of misery,
chagrin and despair, that i still shrunk from the view, not knowing in
whose face i looked. but, when the being spoke, both my mental and
bodily frame received another shock more terrible than the first, for
it was the voice of the great personage i had so long denominated my
friend, of whom i had deemed myself for ever freed, and whose presence
and counsels i now dreaded more than hell. it was his voice, but so
altered—i shall never forget it till my dying day. nay, i can scarce
conceive it possible that any earthly sounds could be so discordant, so
repulsive to every feeling of a human soul, as the tones of the voice
that grated on my ear at that moment. they were the sounds of the pit,
wheezed through a grated cranny, or seemed so to my distempered
imagination.
"so! thou shudderest at my approach now, dost thou?" said he. "is this
all the gratitude that you deign for an attachment of which the annals
of the world furnish no parallel? an attachment which has caused me to
forego power and dominion, might, homage, conquest and adulation: all
that i might gain one highly valued and sanctified spirit to my great
and true, principles of reformation among mankind. wherein have i
offended? what have i done for evil, or what have i not done for your
good; that you would thus shun my presence?"
"great and magnificent prince," said i humbly; "let me request of you
to abandon a poor worthless wight to his own wayward fortune, and
return to the dominion of your people. i am unworthy of the sacrifices
you have made for my sake; and, after all your efforts, i do not feel
that you have rendered either more virtuous or more happy. for the sake
of that which is estimable in human nature, depart from me to your own
home, before you render me a being either altogether above or below the
rest of my fellow creatures. let me plod on towards heaven and
happiness in my own way, like those that have gone before me, and i
promise to stick fast by the great principles which you have so
strenuously inculcated, on condition that you depart and leave me for
ever."
"sooner shall you make the mother abandon the child of her bosom; nay,
sooner cause the shadow to relinquish the substance, than separate me
from your side. our beings are amalgamated, as it were, and consociated
in one, and never shall i depart from this country until i can carry
you in triumph with me."
i can in nowise describe the effect this appalling speech had on me. it
was like the announcement of death to one who had of late deemed
himself free, if not of something worse than death, and of longer
continuance. there was i doomed to remain in misery, subjugated, soul
and body, to one whose presence was become more intolerable to me than
aught on earth could compensate. and at that moment, when he beheld the
anguish of my soul, he could not conceal that he enjoyed it. i was
troubled for an answer, for which he was waiting: it became incumbent
on me to say something after such a protestation of attachment; and, in
some degree to shake the validity of it, i asked, with great
simplicity, where he had been all this while?
"your crimes and your extravagances forced me from your side for a
season," said he, "but now that i hope the day of grace is returned, i
am again drawn towards you by an affection that has neither bounds nor
interest; an affection for which i receive not even the poor return of
gratitude, and which seems to have its radical sources in fascination.
i have been far, far abroad, and have seen much, and transacted much,
since i last spoke with you. during that space, i grievously suspect
that you have been guilty of great crimes and misdemeanours, crimes
that would have sunk an unregenerated person to perdition; but as i
knew it to be only a temporary falling off, a specimen of that liberty
by which the chosen and elected ones are made free, i closed my eyes on
the wilful debasement of our principles, knowing that the
transgressions could never be accounted to your charge, and that in
good time you would come to your senses, and throw the whole weight of
your crimes on the shoulders that had voluntarily stooped to receive
the load."
"certainly i will," said i, "as i and all the justified have a good
right to do. but what crimes? what misdemeanours and transgressions do
you talk about? for my part, i am conscious of none, and am utterly
amazed at insinuations which i do not comprehend."
"you have certainly been left to yourself for a season," returned he,
"having gone on rather like a person in a delirium than a christian in
his sober sense. you are accused of having made away with your mother
privately; as also of the death of a beautiful young lady, whose
affections you had seduced."
"it is an intolerable and monstrous falsehood!" cried i, interrupting,
him. "i never laid a hand on a woman to take away her life, and have
even shunned their society from my childhood. i know nothing of my
mother's exit; nor of that young lady's whom you mention. nothing
whatever."
"i hope it is so," said he. "but it seems there are some strong
presumptuous proofs against you, and i came to warn you this day that a
precognition is in progress, and that unless you are perfectly
convinced, not only of your innocence but of your ability to prove it,
it will be the safest course for you to abscond, and let the trial go
on without you."
"never shall it be said that i shrunk from such a trial as this," said
i. "it would give grounds for suspicions of guilt that never had
existence, even in thought. i will go and show myself in every public
place, that no slanderous tongue may wag against me. i have shed the
blood of sinners, but of these deaths i am guiltless; therefore i will
face every tribunal, and put all my accusers down."
"asseveration will avail you but little," answered he, composedly. "it
is, however, justifiable in its place, although to me it signifies
nothing, who know too well that you did commit both crimes, in your own
person, and with your own hands. far be it from me to betray you;
indeed, i would rather endeavour to palliate the offences; for, though
adverse to nature, i can prove them not to be so to the cause of pure
christianity, by the mode of which we have approved of it, and which we
wish to promulgate."
"if this that you tell me be true," said i, "then is it as true that i
have two souls, which take possession of my bodily frame by turns, the
one being all unconscious of what the other performs; for as sure as i
have at this moment a spirit within me, fashioned and destined to
eternal felicity, as sure am i utterly ignorant of the crimes you now
lay to my charge."
"your supposition may be true in effect," said he. "we are all
subjected to two distinct natures in the same person. i myself have
suffered grievously in that way. the spirit that now directs my
energies is not that with which i was endowed at my creation. it is
changed within me, and so is my whole nature. my former days were those
of grandeur and felicity. but, would you believe it? i was not then a
christian. now i am. i have been converted to its truths by passing
through the fire, and, since my final conversion, my misery has been
extreme. you complain that i have not been able to render you more
happy than you were. alas! do you expect it in the difficult and
exterminating career which you have begun? i, however, promise you
this—a portion of the only happiness which i enjoy, sublime in its
motions, and splendid in its attainments—i will place you on the right
hand of my throne, and show you the grandeur of my domains, and the
felicity of my millions of true professors."
i was once more humbled before this mighty potentate, and promised to
be ruled wholly by his directions, although at that moment my nature
shrunk from the concessions, and my soul longed rather to be inclosed
in the deeps of the sea, or involved once more in utter oblivion. i was
like daniel in the den of lions, without his faith in divine support,
and wholly at their mercy. i felt as one round whose body a deadly
snake is twisted, which continues to hold him in its fangs, without
injuring him, further than in moving its scaly infernal folds with
exulting delight, to let its victim feel to whose power he has
subjected himself; and thus did i for a space drag an existence from
day to day, in utter weariness and helplessness; at one time
worshipping with great fervour of spirit, and at other times so wholly
left to myself as to work all manner of vices and follies with
greediness. in these my enlightened friend never accompanied me, but i
always observed that he was the first to lead me to every one of them,
and then leave me in the lurch. the next day, after these my fallings
off, he never failed to reprove me gently, blaming me for my venial
transgressions; but then he had the art of reconciling all, by
reverting to my justified and infallible state, which i found to prove
a delightful healing salve for every sore.
but, of all my troubles, this was the chief. i was every day and every
hour assailed with accusations of deeds of which i was wholly ignorant;
of acts of cruelty, injustice, defamation, and deceit; of pieces of
business which i could not be made to comprehend; with lawsuits,
details, arrestments of judgment, and a thousand interminable quibbles
from the mouth of my loquacious and conceited attorney. so miserable
was my life rendered by these continued attacks that i was often
obliged to lock myself up for days together, never seeing any person
save my man samuel scrape, who was a very honest blunt fellow, a
staunch cameronian, but withal very little conversant in religious
matters. he said he came from a place called penpunt, which i thought a
name so ludicrous that i called him by the name of his native village,
an appellation of which he was very proud, and answered everything with
more civility and perspicuity when i denominated him penpunt, than
samuel, his own christian name. of this peasant was i obliged to make a
companion on sundry occasions, and strange indeed were the details
which he gave me concerning myself, and the ideas of the country people
concerning me. i took down a few of these in writing, to put off the
time, and here leave them on record to show how the best and greatest
actions are misconstrued among sinful and ignorant men:
"you say, samuel, that i hired you myself—that i have been a good
enough master to you, and have paid you your weekly wages punctually.
now, how is it that you say this, knowing, as you do, that i never
hired you, and never paid you a sixpence of wages in the whole course
of my life, excepting this last month?"
"ye may as weel say, master, that water's no water, or that, stanes are
no stanes. but that's just your gate, an' it's a great pity, aye to do
a thing an profess the clean contrair. weel then, since you havena paid
me ony wages, an' i can prove day and date when i was hired, an' came
hame to your service, will you be sae kind as to pay me now? that's the
best way o' curing a man o' the mortal disease o' leasing-making that i
ken o'."
"i should think that penpunt and cameronian principles would not admit
of a man taking twice payment for the same article."
"in sic a case as this, sir, it disna hinge upon principles, but a
piece o' good manners; an' i can tell you that, at sic a crisis, a
cameronian is a gay-an weel-bred man. he's driven to this, and he maun
either make a breach in his friend's good name, or in his purse; an'
oh, sir, whilk o' thae, think you, is the most precious? for instance,
an a galloway drover had comed to the town o' penpunt, an' said to a
cameronian (the folk's a' cameronians there), 'sir, i want to buy your
cow,' 'vera weel,' says the cameronian, 'i just want to sell the cow,
sae gie me twanty punds scots, an' take her w' ye.' it's a bargain. the
drover takes away the cow, an' gies the cameronian his twanty pund
scots. but after that, he meets him again on the white sands, amang a'
the drovers an' dealers o' the land, an' the gallowayman, he says to
the cameronian, afore a' thae witnesses, 'come, master whiggam, i hae
never paid you for yon bit useless cow that i bought. i'll pay her the
day, but you maun mind the luck-penny; there's muckle need for 't'—or
something to that purpose. the cameronian then turns out to be a civil
man, an' canna bide to make the man baith a feele an' liar at the same
time, afore a' his associates; an' therefore he pits his principles aff
at the side, to be kind o' sleepin' partner, as it war, an' brings up
his good breeding to stand at the counter: he pockets the money, gies
the galloway drover time o' day, an' comes his way. an' wha's to blame?
man mind yoursel is the first commandment. a cameronian's principles
never came atween him an' his purse, nor sanna in the present case;
for, as i canna bide to make you out a leear, i'll thank you for my
wages."
"well, you shall have them, samuel, if you declare to me that i hired
you myself in this same person, and bargained with you with this same
tongue and voice with which i speak to you just now."
"that i do declare, unless ye hae twa persons o' the same appearance,
and twa tongues to the same voice. but, 'od saif us, sir, do you ken
what the auld wives o' the clachan say about you?"
"how should i, when no one repeats it to me?"
"oo, i trow it's a' stuff—folk shouldna heed what's said by auld
crazy kimmers. but there are some o' them weel kend for witches, too;
an' they say, 'lord have a care o' us!' they say the deil's often seen
gaun sidie for sidie w' ye, whiles in ae shape, an' whiles in another.
an' they say that he whiles takes your ain shape, or else enters into
you, and then you turn a deil yoursel."
i was so astounded at this terrible idea that had gone abroad,
regarding my fellowship with the prince of darkness, that i could make
no answer to the fellow's information, but sat like one in a stupor;
and if it had not been for my well-founded faith, and conviction that i
was a chosen and elected one before the world was made, i should at
that moment have given in to the popular belief, and fallen into the
sin of despondency; but i was preserved from such a fatal error by an
inward and unseen supporter. still the insinuation was so like what i
felt myself that i was greatly awed and confounded.
the poor fellow observed this, and tried to do away the impression by
some further sage remarks of his own.
"hout, dear sir, it is balderdash, there's nae doubt o't. it is the
crownhead o' absurdity to tak in the havers o' auld wives for gospel. i
told them that my master was a peeous man, an' a sensible man; an', for
praying, that he could ding auld macmillan himsel. 'sae could the
deil,' they said, 'when he liket, either at preaching or praying, if
these war to answer his ain ends.' 'na, na,' says i, 'but he's a strick
believer in a' the truths o' christianity, my master.' they said, sae
was satan, for that he was the firmest believer in a' the truths of
christianity that was out o' heaven; an' that, sin' the revolution that
the gospel had turned sae rife, he had been often driven to the shift
o' preaching it himsel, for the purpose o' getting some wrang tenets
introduced into it, and thereby turning it into blasphemy and ridicule."
i confess, to my shame, that i was so overcome by this jumble of
nonsense that a chillness came over me, and, in spite of all my efforts
to shake off the impression it had made, i fell into a faint. samuel
soon brought me to myself, and, after a deep draught of wine and water,
i was greatly revived, and felt my spirit rise above the sphere of
vulgar conceptions and the restrained views of unregenerate men. the
shrewd but loquacious fellow, perceiving this, tried to make some
amends for the pain he had occasioned to me by the following story,
which i noted down, and which was brought on by a conversation to the
following purport:
"now, penpunt, you may tell me all that passed between you and the
wives of the clachan. i am better of that stomach qualm, with which i
am sometimes seized, and shall be much amused by hearing the sentiments
of noted witches regarding myself and my connections."
"weel, you see, sir, i says to them, 'it will be lang afore the deil
intermeddle wi' as serious a professor, and as fervent a prayer as my
master, for, gin he gets the upper hand o' sickan men, wha's to be
safe?' an', what think ye they said, sir? there was ane lucky shaw set
up her lang lantern chafts, an' answered me, an' a' the rest shanned
and noddit in assent an' approbation: 'ye silly, sauchless, cameronian
cuif!' quo she, 'is that a' that ye ken about the wiles and doings o'
the prince o' the air, that rules an' works in the bairns of
disobedience? gin ever he observes a proud professor, wha has mae than
ordinary pretensions to a divine calling, and that reards and prays
till the very howlets learn his preambles, that's the man auld simmie
fixes on to mak a dishclout o'. he canna get rest in hell, if he sees a
man, or a set of men o' this stamp, an, when he sets fairly to work, it
is seldom that he disna bring them round till his ain measures by hook
or by crook. then, oh! it is a grand prize for him, an' a proud deil he
is, when he gangs hame to his ain ha', wi' a batch o' the souls o' sic
strenuous professors on his back. aye, i trow, auld ingleby, the
liverpool packman, never came up glasco street wi' prouder pomp when he
had ten horse-laids afore him o' flanders lace, an' hollin lawn, an'
silks an' satins frae the eastern indians, than satan wad strodge into
hell with a packlaid o' the souls o' proud professors on his braid
shoulders. ha, ha, ha! i think i see how the auld thief wad be gaun
through his gizened dominions, crying his wares, in derision, "wha will
buy a fresh, cauler divine, a bouzy bishop, a fasting zealot, or a
piping priest?" for a' their prayers an' their praises, their aumuses,
an' their penances, their whinings, their howlings, their rantings, an'
their ravings, here they come at last! behold the end! here go the
rare and precious wares! a fat professor for a bodle, an' a lean ane
for half a merk!' i declare i trembled at the auld hag's ravings, but
the lave o' the kimmers applauded the sayings as sacred truths. an'
then lucky went on: 'there are many wolves in sheep's claithing, among
us, my man; mony deils aneath the masks o' zealous professors, roaming
about in kirks and meetinghouses o' the land. it was but the year afore
the last that the people o' the town o' auchtermuchty grew so rigidly
righteous that the meanest hind among them became a shining light in
ither towns an' parishes. there was naught to be heard, neither night
nor day, but preaching, praying, argumentation, an' catechising in a'
the famous town o' auchtermuchty. the young men wooed their sweethearts
out o' the song o' solomon, an' the girls returned answers in strings
o' verses out o' the psalms. at the lint-swinglings, they said
questions round; and read chapters, and sang hymns at bridals; auld and
young prayed in their dreams, an' prophesied in their sleep, till the
deils in the farrest nooks o' hell were alarmed, and moved to
commotion. gin it hadna been an auld carl, robin ruthven, auchtermuchty
wad at that time hae been ruined and lost for ever. but robin was a
cunning man, an' had rather mae wits than his ain, for he had been in
the hands o' the fairies when he was young, an' a' kinds o' spirits
were visible to his een, an' their language as familiar to him as his
ain mother tongue. robin was sitting on the side o' the west lowmond,
ae still gloomy night in september, when he saw a bridal o' corbie
craws coming east the lift, just on the edge o' the gloaming. the
moment that robin saw them, he kenned, by their movements, that they
were craws o' some ither warld than this; so he signed himself, and
crap into the middle o' his bourock. the corbie craws came a' an' sat
down round about him, an' they poukit their black sooty wings, an'
spread them out to the breeze to cool; and robin heard ae corbie
speaking, an' another answering him; and the tane said to the tither:
"where will the ravens find a prey the night?" "on the lean crazy souls
o' auchtermuchty," quo the tither. "i fear they will be o'er weel
wrappit up in the warm flannens o' faith, an clouted wi' the dirty duds
o' repentance, for us to mak a meal o'," quo the first. "whaten vile
sounds are these that i hear coming bumming up the hill?" "oh, these
are the hymns and praises o' the auld wives and creeshy louns o'
auchtermuchty, wha are gaun crooning their way to heaven; an', gin it
warna for the shame o' being beat, we might let our great enemy tak
them. for sic a prize as he will hae! heaven, forsooth! what shall we
think o' heaven, if it is to be filled wi' vermin like thae, amang whom
there is mair poverty and pollution than i can name." "no matter for
that," said the first, "we cannot have our power set at defiance;
though we should put them on the thief's hole, we must catch them, and
catch them with their own bait, too. come all to church to-morrow, and
i'll let you hear how i'll gull the saints of auchtermuchty. in the
meantime, there is a feast on the sidlaw hills tonight, below the hill
of macbeth—mount, diabolus, and fly." then, with loud croaking and
crowing, the bridal of corbies again scaled the dusky air, and left
robin ruthven in the middle of his cairn.
"'the next day the congregation met in the kirk of auchtermuchty, but
the minister made not his appearance. the elder ran out and in making
inquiries; but they could learn nothing, save that the minister was
missing. they ordered the clerk to sing a part of the th psalm,
until they saw if the minister would cast up. the clerk did as he was
ordered, and, by the time he reached the th verse, a strange divine
entered the church, by the western door, and advanced solemnly up to
the pulpit. the eyes of all the congregation were riveted on the
sublime stranger, who was clothed in a robe of black sackcloth, that
flowed all around him, and trailed far behind, and they weened him an
angel, come to exhort them, in disguise. he read out his text from the
prophecies of ezekiel, which consisted of these singular words: "i will
overturn, overturn, overturn it; and it shall be no more, until he
come, whose right it is, and i will give it him."
"'from these words he preached such a sermon as never was heard by
human ears, at least never by ears of auchtermuchty. it was a true,
sterling, gospel sermon—it was striking, sublime, and awful in the
extreme. he finally made out the it, mentioned in the text, to mean,
properly and positively, the notable town of auchtermuchty. he proved
all the people in it, to their perfect satisfaction, to be in the gall
of bitterness and bond of iniquity, and he assured them that god would
overturn them, their principles, and professions; and that they should
be no more, until the devil, the town's greatest enemy, came, and then
it should be given unto him for a prey, for it was his right, and to
him it belonged, if there was not forthwith a radical change made in
all their opinions and modes of worship.
"'the inhabitants of auchtermuchty were electrified—they were charmed;
they were actually raving mad about the grand and sublime truths
delivered to them by this eloquent and impressive preacher of
christianity. "he is a prophet of the lord," said one, "sent to warn
us, as jonah was sent to the ninevites." "oh, he is an angel sent from
heaven, to instruct this great city," said another, "for no man ever
uttered truths so sublime before." the good people of auchtermuchty
were in perfect raptures with the preacher, who had thus sent them to
hell by the slump, tag-rag, and bobtail! nothing in the world delights
a truly religious people so much as consigning them to eternal
damnation. they wandered after the preacher—they crowded together, and
spoke of his sermon with admiration, and still, as they conversed, the
wonder and the admiration increased; so that honest robin ruthven's
words would not be listened to. it was in vain that he told them he
heard a raven speaking, and another raven answering him: the people
laughed him to scorn, and kicked him out of their assemblies, as a one
who spoke evil of dignities; and they called him a warlock, an' a daft
body, to think to mak language out o' the crouping o' craws.
"'the sublime preacher could not be heard of, although all the country
was sought for him, even to the minutest corner of st. johnston and
dundee; but as he had announced another sermon on the same text, on a
certain day, all the inhabitants of that populous country, far and
near, flocked to auchtermuchty. cupar, newburgh, and strathmiglo,
turned out men, women and children. perth and dundee gave their
thousands; and, from the east nook of fife to the foot of the grampian
hills, there was nothing but running and riding that morning to
auchtermuchty. the kirk would not hold the thousandth part of them. a
splendid tent was erected on the brae north of the town, and round that
the countless congregation assembled. when they were all waiting
anxiously for the great preacher, behold, robin ruthven set up his head
in the tent, and warned his countrymen to beware of the doctrines they
were about to hear, for he could prove, to their satisfaction, that
they were all false, and tended to their destruction!
"'the whole multitude raised a cry of indignation against robin, and
dragged him from the tent, the elders rebuking him, and the multitude
threatening to resort to stronger measures; and, though he told them a
plain and unsophisticated tale of the black corbies, he was only
derided. the great preacher appeared once more, and went through his
two discourses with increased energy and approbation. all who heard him
were amazed, and many of them went into fits, writhing and foaming in a
state of the most horrid agitation. robin ruthven sat on the outskirts
of the great assembly, listening with the rest, and perceived what
they, in the height of their enthusiasm, perceived not the ruinous
tendency of the tenets so sublimely inculcated. robin kenned the voice
of his friend the corby-craw again, and was sure he could not be wrong:
sae, when public worship was finished, a' the elders an' a' the gentry
flocked about the great preacher, as he stood on the green brae in the
sight of the hale congregation, an' a' war alike anxious to pay him
some mark o' respect. robin ruthven came in amang the thrang, to try to
effect what he had promised; and, with the greatest readiness and
simplicity, just took baud o' the side o' the wide gown, and, in sight
of a' present, held it aside as high as the preacher's knee, and,
behold, there was a pair o' cloven feet! the auld thief was fairly
catched in the very height o' his proud conquest, an' put down by an
auld carl. he could feign nae mair, but, gnashing on robin wi' his
teeth, he dartit into the air like a fiery dragon, an' keust a reid
rainbow o'er the taps o' the lowmonds.
"'a' the auld wives an weavers o' auchtermuchty fell down flat wi'
affright, an' betook them to their prayers aince again, for they saw
the dreadfu' danger they had escapit, an' frae that day to this it is a
hard matter to gar an auchtermuchty man listen to a sermon at a', an' a
harder ane still to gar him applaud ane, for he thinks aye that he sees
the cloven foot peeping out frae aneath ilka sentence.
"'now, this is a true story, my man,' quo the auld wife, 'an', whenever
you are doubtfu' of a man, take auld robin ruthven's plan, an' look for
the cloven foot, for it's a thing that winna weel hide; an' it appears
whiles where ane wadna think o't. it will keek out frae aneath the
parson's gown, the lawyer's wig, and the cameronian's blue bannet; but
still there is a gouden rule whereby to detect it, an' that never,
never fails.' the auld witch didna gie me the rule, an' though i hae
heard tell o't often an' often, shame fa' me an i ken what it is! but
ye will ken it well, an' it wad be nae the waur of a trial on some o'
your friends, maybe; for they say there's a certain gentleman seen
walking wi' you whiles, that, wherever he sets his foot, the grass
withers as gin it war scoudered wi' a het ern. his presence be about
us! what's the matter wi' you, master. are ye gaun to take the calm o'
the stamock again?"
the truth is, that the clown's absurd story, with the still more
ridiculous application, made me sick at heart a second time. it was not
because i thought my illustrious friend was the devil, or that i took a
fool's idle tale as a counterbalance to divine revelation that had
assured me of my justification in the sight of god before the existence
of time. but, in short, it gave me a view of my own state, at which i
shuddered, as indeed i now always did when the image of my devoted
friend and ruler presented itself to my mind. i often communed, with my
heart on this, and wondered how a connection, that had the well-being
of mankind solely in view, could be productive of fruits so bitter. i
then went to try my works by the saviour's golden rule, as my servant
had put it into my head to do; and, behold, not one of them could stand
the test. i had shed blood on a ground on which i could not admit that
any man had a right to shed mine; and i began to doubt the motives of
my adviser once more, not that they were intentionally bad, but that
his was some great mind led astray by enthusiasm or some overpowering
passion.
he seemed to comprehend every one of these motions of my heart, for his
manner towards me altered every day. it first became anything but
agreeable, then supercilious, and, finally, intolerable; so that i
resolved to shake him off, cost what it would, even though i should be
reduced to beg my bread in a foreign land. to do it at home was
impossible, as he held my life in his hands, to sell it whenever he had
a mind; and, besides, his ascendancy over me was as complete as that of
a huntsman over his dogs: i was even so weak as, the next time i met
with him, to look steadfastly at his foot, to see if it was not cloven
into two hoofs. it was the foot of a gentleman in every respect, so far
as appearances went, but the form of his counsels was somewhat
equivocal, and, if not double, they were amazingly crooked.
but, if i had taken my measures to abscond and fly from my native
place, in order to free myself of this tormenting, intolerant, and
bloody reformer, he had likewise taken his to expel me, or throw me
into the hands of justice. it seems that, about this time, i was
haunted by some spies connected with my late father and brother, of
whom the mistress of the former was one. my brother's death had been
witnessed by two individuals; indeed, i always had an impression that
it was witnessed by more than one, having some faint recollection of
hearing voices and challenges close beside me; and this woman had
searched about until she found these people; but, as i shrewdly
suspected, not without the assistance of the only person in my
secret—my own warm and devoted friend. i say this, because i found
that he had them concealed in the neighbourhood, and then took me again
and again where i was fully exposed to their view, without being aware.
one time in particular, on pretence of gratifying my revenge on that
base woman, he knew so well where she lay concealed that he led me to
her, and left me to the mercy of two viragos who had very nigh taken my
life. my time of residence at dalcastle was wearing to a crisis. i
could no longer live with my tyrant, who haunted me like my shadow;
and, besides, it seems there were proofs of murder leading against me
from all quarters. of part of these i deemed myself quite free, but the
world deemed otherwise; and how the matter would have gone god only
knows, for, the case never having undergone a judicial trial, i do not.
it perhaps, however, behoves me here to relate all that i know of it,
and it is simply this:
on the first of june,  (well may i remember the day), i was sitting
locked in my secret chamber, in a state of the utmost despondency,
revolving in my mind what i ought to do to be free of my persecutors,
and wishing myself a worm, or a moth, that i might be crushed and at
rest, when behold samuel entered, with eyes like to start out of his
head, exclaiming: "for god's sake, master, fly and hide yourself, for
your mother's found, an' as sure as you're a living soul, the blame is
gaun to fa' on you!"
"my mother found!" said i. "and, pray, where has she been all this
while?" in the meantime, i was terribly discomposed at the thoughts of
her return.
"been, sir! been? why, she has been where ye pat her, it seems—lying
buried in the sands o' the linn. i can tell you, ye will see her a
frightsome figure, sic as i never wish to see again. an' the young lady
is found too, sir: an' it is said the devil—i beg pardon, sir, your
friend, i mean—it is said your friend has made the discovery, an' the
folk are away to raise officers, an' they will be here in an hour or
two at the farthest, sir; an' sae you hae not a minute to lose, for
there's proof, sir, strong proof, an' sworn proof, that ye were last
seen wi' them baith; sae, unless ye can gie a' the better an account o'
baith yoursel an' them either hide or flee for your bare life."
"i will neither hide nor fly," said i, "for i am as guiltless of the
blood of these women as the child unborn."
"the country disna think sae, master; an' i can assure you that, should
evidence fail, you run a risk o' being torn limb frae limb. they are
bringing the corpse here, to gar ye touch them baith afore witnesses,
an' plenty o' witnesses there will be!"
"they shall not bring them here," cried i, shocked beyond measure at
the experiment about to be made. "go, instantly and debar them from
entering my gate with their bloated and mangled carcases!"
"the body of your own mother, sir!" said the fellow emphatically. i was
in terrible agitation; and, being driven to my wits' end, i got up and
strode furiously round and round the room. samuel wist not what to do,
but i saw by his staring he deemed me doubly guilty. a tap came to the
chamber door: we both started like guilty creatures; and as for samuel,
his hairs stood all on end with alarm, so that, when i motioned to him,
he could scarcely advance to open the door. he did so at length, and
who should enter but my illustrious friend, manifestly in the utmost
state of alarm. the moment that samuel admitted him, the former made
his escape by the prince's side as he entered, seemingly in a state of
distraction. i was little better, when i saw this dreaded personage
enter my chamber, which he had never before attempted; and, being
unable to ask his errand, i suppose i stood and gazed on him like a
statue.
"i come with sad and tormenting tidings to you, my beloved and
ungrateful friend," said he, "but, having only a minute left to save
your life, i have come to attempt it. there is a mob coming towards you
with two dead bodies, which will place you in circumstances
disagreeable enough: but that is not the worst, for of that you may be
able to clear yourself. at this moment there is a party of officers,
with a justiciary warrant from edinburgh, surrounding the house, and
about to begin the search of it for you. if you fall into their hands,
you are inevitably lost; for i have been making earnest inquiries, and
find that everything is in train for your ruin."
"aye, and who has been the cause of all this?" said i, with great
bitterness. but he stopped me short, adding, "there is no time for such
reflections at present; i gave my word of honour, that your life should
be safe from the hand of man. so it shall, if the power remain with me
to save it. i am come to redeem my pledge, and to save your life by the
sacrifice of my own. here—not one word of expostulation, change habits
with me, and you may then pass by the officers, and guards, and even
through the approaching mob, with the most perfect temerity. there is a
virtue in this garb, and, instead of offering to detain you, they shall
pay you obeisance. make haste, and leave this place for the present,
flying where you best may, and, if i escape from these dangers that
surround me, i will endeavour to find you out, and bring you what
intelligence i am able."
i put on his green frock coat, buff belt, and a sort of a turban that
he always wore on his head, somewhat resembling a bishop's mitre: he
drew his hand thrice across my face, and i withdrew as he continued to
urge me. my hall door and postern gate were both strongly guarded, and
there were sundry armed people within, searching the closets; but all
of them made way for me, and lifted their caps as i passed by them.
only one superior officer accosted me, asking if i had seen the
culprit. i knew not what answer to make, but chanced to say, with great
truth and propriety: "he is safe enough." the man beckoned with a
smile, as much as to say: "thank you, sir, that is quite sufficient,"
and i walked deliberately away.
i had not well left the gate till, hearing a great noise coming from
the deep glen towards the east, i turned that way, deeming myself quite
secure in this my new disguise, to see what it was, and if matters were
as had been described to me. there i met a great mob, sure enough,
coming with two dead bodies stretched on boards, and decently covered
with white sheets. i would fain have examined their appearance, had i
not perceived the apparent fury in the looks of the men, and judged
from that how much more safe it was for me not to intermeddle in the
affray. i cannot tell how it was, but i felt a strange and unwonted
delight in viewing this scene, and a certain pride of heart in being
supposed the perpetrator of the unnatural crimes laid to my charge.
this was a feeling quite new to me; and if there were virtues in the
robes of the illustrious foreigner, who had without all dispute
preserved my life at this time: i say, if there was any inherent virtue
in these robes of his, as he had suggested, this was one of their
effects' that they turned my heart towards that which was evil,
horrible, and disgustful.
i mixed with the mob to hear what they were saying. every tongue was
engaged in loading me with the most opprobrious epithets! one called me
a monster of nature; another an incarnate devil; and another a creature
made to be cursed in time and eternity. i retired from them and, winded
my way southwards, comforting myself with the assurance that so mankind
had used and persecuted the greatest fathers and apostles of the
christian church, and that their vile opprobrium could not alter the
counsels of heaven concerning me.
on going over that rising ground called dorington moor, i could not
help turning round and taking a look of dalcastle. i had little doubt
that it would be my last look, and nearly as little ambition that it
should not. i thought how high my hopes of happiness and advancement
had been on entering that mansion, and taking possession of its rich
and extensive domains, and how miserably i had been disappointed. on
the contrary, i had experienced nothing but chagrin, disgust, and
terror; and i now consoled myself with the hope that i should
henceforth shake myself free of the chains of my great tormentor, and
for that privilege was i willing to encounter any earthly distress. i
could not help perceiving that i was now on a path which was likely to
lead me into a species of distress hitherto unknown, and hardly dreamed
of by me, and that was total destitution. for all the riches i had been
possessed of a few hours previous to this, i found that here i was
turned out of my lordly possessions without a single merk, or the power
of lifting and commanding the smallest sum, without being thereby
discovered and seized. had it been possible for me to have escaped in
my own clothes, i had a considerable sum secreted in these, but, by the
sudden change, i was left without a coin for present necessity. but i
had hope in heaven, knowing that the just man would not be left
destitute and that, though many troubles surrounded him, he would at
last be set free from them all. i was possessed of strong and brilliant
parts, and a liberal education; and, though i had somehow unaccountably
suffered my theological qualifications to fall into desuetude, since my
acquaintance with the ablest and most rigid of all theologians, i had
nevertheless hopes that, by preaching up redemption by grace,
preordination, and eternal purpose, i should yet be enabled to benefit
mankind in some country, and rise to high distinction.
these were some of the thoughts by which i consoled myself as i posted
on my way southwards, avoiding the towns and villages, and falling into
the cross ways that led from each of the great roads passing east and
west to another. i lodged the first night in the house of a country
weaver, into which i stepped at a late hour, quite overcome with hunger
and fatigue, having travelled not less than thirty miles from my late
home. the man received me ungraciously, telling me of a gentleman's
house at no great distance, and of an inn a little farther away; but i
said i delighted more in the society of a man like him than that of any
gentleman of the land, for my concerns were with the poor of this
world, it being easier for a camel to go through the eye of a needle
than for a rich man to enter into the kingdom of heaven.
the weaver's wife, who sat with a child on her knee, and had not
hitherto opened her mouth, hearing me speak in that serious and
religious style, stirred up the fire with her one hand; then, drawing a
chair near it, she said: "come awa, honest lad, in by here; sin' it be
sae that you belang to him wha gies us a' that we hae, it is but right
that you should share a part. you are a stranger, it is true, but them
that winna entertain a stranger will never entertain an angel unawares."
i never was apt to be taken with the simplicity of nature; in general i
despised it; but, owing to my circumstances at the time, i was deeply
affected by the manner of this poor woman's welcome. the weaver
continued in a churlish mood throughout the evening, apparently
dissatisfied with what his wife had done in entertaining me, and spoke
to her in a manner so crusty that i thought proper to rebuke him, for
the woman was comely in her person, and virtuous in her conversation;
but the weaver, her husband, was large of make, ill-favoured, and
pestilent; therefore did i take him severely to task for the tenor of
his conduct; but the man was froward, and answered me rudely with
sneering and derision and, in the height of his caprice, he said to his
wife: "whan focks are sae keen of a chance o' entertaining angels,
gude-wife, it wad maybe be worth their while to tak tent what kind o'
angels they are. it wadna wonder me vera muckle an ye had entertained
your friend the deil the night, for aw thought aw fand a saur o' reek
an' brimstane about him. he's nane o' the best o' angels, an focks
winna hae muckle credit by entertaining him."
certainly, in the assured state i was in, i had as little reason to be
alarmed at mention being made of the devil as any person on earth: of
late, however, i felt that the reverse was the case, and that any
allusion to my great enemy moved me exceedingly. the weaver's speech
had such an effect on me that both he and his wife were alarmed at my
looks. the latter thought i was angry, and chided her husband gently
for his rudeness; but the weaver himself rather seemed to be confirmed
in his opinion that i was the devil, for he looked round like a
startled roe-buck, and immediately betook him to the family bible.
i know not whether it was on purpose to prove my identity or not, but i
think he was going to desire me either to read a certain portion of
scripture that he had sought out, or to make family worship, had not
the conversation at that instant taken another turn; for the weaver,
not knowing how to address me, abruptly asked my name, as he was about
to put the bible into my hands. never having considered myself in the
light of a male-factor, but rather as a champion in the cause of truth,
and finding myself perfectly safe under my disguise, i had never once
thought of the utility of changing my name, and, when the man asked me,
i hesitated; but, being compelled to say something, i said my name was
cowan. the man stared at me, and then at his wife, with a look that
spoke a knowledge of something alarming or mysterious.
"ha! cowan?" said he. "that's most extraordinar! not colwan, i hope?"
"no: cowan is my sirname," said i. "but why not colwan, there being so
little difference in the sound?"
"i was feared ye might be that waratch that the deil has taen the
possession o', an' eggit him on to kill baith his father an' his
mother, his only brother, an' his sweetheart," said he; "an', to say
the truth, i'm no that sure about you yet, for i see you're gaun wi'
arms on ye."
"not i, honest man," said i. "i carry no arms; a man conscious of his
innocence and uprightness of heart needs not to carry arms in his
defence now."
"aye, aye, maister," said he; "an' pray what div ye ca' this bit
windlestrae that's appearing here?" with that he pointed to something
on the inside of the breast of my frock-coat. i looked at it, and there
certainly was the gilded haft of a poniard, the same weapon i had seen
and handled before, and which i knew my illustrious companion carried
about with him; but till that moment i knew not that i was in
possession of it. i drew it out: a more dangerous or insidious-looking
weapon could not be conceived. the weaver and his wife were both
frightened, the latter in particular; and she being my friend, and i
dependent on their hospitality for that night, i said: "i declare i
knew not that i carried this small rapier, which has been in my coat by
chance, and not by any design of mine. but, lest you should think that
i meditate any mischief to any under this roof i give it into your
hands, requesting of you to lock it by till tomorrow, or when i shall
next want it."
the woman seemed rather glad to get hold of it; and taking it from me,
she went into a kind of pantry out of my sight, and locked the weapon
up; and then the discourse went on.
"there cannot be such a thing in reality," said i, "as the story you
were mentioning just now, of a man whose name resembles mine."
"it's likely that you ken a wee better about the story than i do,
maister," said he, "suppose you do leave the l out of your name. an'
yet i think sic a waratch, an' a murderer, wad hae taen a name wi' some
gritter difference in the sound. but the story is just that true that
there were twa o' the queen's officers here nae mair than an hour ago,
in pursuit o' the vagabond, for they gat some intelligence that he had
fled this gate; yet they said he had been last seen wi' black claes on,
an' they supposed he was clad in black. his ain servant is wi' them,
for the purpose o' kennin the scoundrel, an' they're galloping through
the country like madmen. i hope in god they'll get him, an' rack his
neck for him!"
i could not say amen to the weaver's prayer, and therefore tried to
compose myself as well as i could, and made some religious comment on
the causes of the nation's depravity. but suspecting that my potent
friend had betrayed my flight and disguise, to save his life, i was
very uneasy, and gave myself up for lost. i said prayers in the family,
with the tenor of which the wife was delighted, but the weaver still
dissatisfied; and, after a supper of the most homely fare, he tried to
start an argument with me, proving that everything for which i had
interceded in my prayer was irrelevant to man's present state. but i,
being weary and distressed in mind, shunned the contest, and requested
a couch whereon to repose.
i was conducted into the other end of the house, among looms, treadles,
pirns, and confusion without end; and there, in a sort of box, was i
shut up for my night's repose, for the weaver, as he left me,
cautiously turned the key of my apartment, and left me to shift for
myself among the looms, determined that i should escape from the house
with nothing. after he and his wife and children were crowded into
their den, i heard the two mates contending furiously about me in
suppressed voices, the one maintaining the probability that i was the
murderer, and the other proving the impossibility of it. the husband,
however, said as much as let me understand that he had locked me up on
purpose to bring the military, or officers of justice, to seize me. i
was in the utmost perplexity, yet for all that, and the imminent danger
i was in, i fell asleep, and a more troubled and tormenting sleep never
enchained a mortal frame. i had such dreams that they will not bear
repetition, and early in the morning i awaked, feverish, and parched
with thirst.
i went to call mine host, that he might let me out to the open air,
but, before doing so, i thought it necessary to put on some clothes. in
attempting to do this, a circumstance arrested my attention (for which
i could in nowise account, which to this day i cannot unriddle, nor
shall i ever be able to comprehend it while i live): the frock and
turban, which had furnished my disguise on the preceding day, were both
removed, and my own black coat and cocked hat laid down in their place.
at first i thought i was in a dream, and felt the weaver's beam, web,
and treadle-strings with my hands, to convince myself that i was awake.
i was certainly awake; and there was the door locked firm and fast as
it was the evening before. i carried my own black coat to the small
window and examined it. it was my own in verity; and the sums of money
that i had concealed in case of any emergency, remained untouched. i
trembled with astonishment; and on my return from the small window went
doiting in amongst the weaver's looms, till i entangled myself, and
could not get out again without working great deray amongst the coarse
linen threads that stood in warp from one end of the apartment unto the
other. i had no knife whereby to cut the cords of this wicked man, and
therefore was obliged to call out lustily for assistance. the weaver
came half naked, unlocked the door, and, setting in his head and long
neck, accosted me thus:
"what now, mr. satan? what for art ye roaring that gate? are you fawn
inna little hell, instead o' the big muckil ane? deil be in your
reistit trams! what for have ye abscondit yoursel into ma leddy's wab
for?"
"friend, i beg your pardon," said i. "i wanted to be at the light, and
have somehow unfortunately involved myself in the intricacies of your
web, from which i cannot get clear without doing you a great injury.
pray do lend your experienced hand to extricate me."
"may aw the pearls o' damnation light on your silly snout, an i dinna
estricat ye weel enough! ye ditit donnart, deil's burd that ye be! what
made ye gang howkin in there to be a poor man's ruin? come out, ye vile
rag-of-a-muffin, or i gar ye come out wi' mair shame and disgrace, an'
fewer haill banes in your body."
my feet had slipped down through the double warpings of a web, and not
being able to reach the ground with them (there being a small pit
below) i rode upon a number of yielding threads, and, there being
nothing else that i could reach, to extricate myself was impossible. i
was utterly powerless; and, besides, the yarn and cords hurt me very
much. for all that, the destructive weaver seized a loom-spoke, and
began a-beating me most unmercifully, while, entangled as i was, i
could do nothing but shout aloud for mercy, or assistance, whichever
chanced to be within hearing. the latter at length made its appearance
in the form of the weaver's wife, in the same state of dishabille with
himself, who instantly interfered, and that most strenuously, on my
behalf. before her arrival, however, i had made a desperate effort to
throw myself out of the entanglement i was in; for the weaver continued
repeating his blows and cursing me so that i determined to get out of
his meshes at any risk. the effect made my case worse; for, my feet
being wrapt among the nether threads, as i threw myself from my saddle
on the upper ones, my feet brought the others up through these, and i
hung with my head down and my feet as firm as they had been in a vice.
the predicament of the web being thereby increased, the weaver's wrath
was doubled in proportion, and he laid on without mercy.
at this critical juncture the wife arrived, and without hesitation
rushed before her offended lord, withholding his hand from injuring me
further, although then it was uplifted along with the loom-spoke in
overbearing ire. "dear johnny! i think ye be gaen dementit this
morning. be quiet, my dear, an' dinna begin a boddel brigg business in
your ain house. what for ir ye persecutin' a servant o' the lord's that
gate, an' pitting the life out o' him wi' his head down an' his heels
up?"
"had ye said a servant o' the deil's, nans, ye wad hae been nearer the
nail, for gin he binna the auld ane himsel, he's gayan sib till him.
there, didna i lock him in on purpose to bring the military on him; an'
in the place o' that, hasna he keepit me in a sleep a' this while as
deep as death? an' here do i find him abscondit like a speeder i' the
mids o' my leddy's wab, an' me dreamin' a' the night that i had the
deil i' my house, an' that he was clapper-clawin me ayont the loom.
have at you, ye brunstane thief!" and, in spite of the good woman's
struggles, he lent me another severe blow.
"now, johnny dods, my man! oh, johnny dods, think if that be like a
christian, and ane o' the heroes o' boddel brigg, to entertain a
stranger, an' then bind him in a web wi' his head down, an' mell him to
death! oh, johnny dods, think what you are about! slack a pin, an' let
the good honest religious lad out."
the weaver was rather overcome, but still stood to his point that i was
the deil, though in better temper; and, as he slackened the web to
release me, he remarked, half laughing: "wha wad hae thought that john
dods should hae escapit a' the snares an' dangers that circumfauldit
him, an' at last should hae weaved a net to catch the deil."
the wife released me soon, and carefully whispered me, at the same
time, that it would be as well for me to dress and be going. i was not
long in obeying, and dressed myself in my black clothes, hardly knowing
what i did, what to think, or whither to betake myself. i was sore hurt
by the blows of the desperate ruffian; and, what was worse, my ankle
was so much strained that i could hardly set my foot to the ground. i
was obliged to apply to the weaver once more, to see if i could learn
anything about my clothes, or how the change was effected. "sir," said
i, "how comes it that you have robbed me of my clothes, and put these
down in their place over night?"
"ha! thae claes? me pit down the claes!" said he, gaping with
astonishment, and touching the clothes with the point of his
forefinger. "i never saw them afore, as i have death to meet wi', so
help me god!"
he strode into the work-house where i slept, to satisfy himself that my
clothes were not there, and returned perfectly aghast with
consternation. "the doors were baith fast lockit," said he. "i could
hae defied a rat either to hae gotten out or in. my dream has been
true! my dream has been true! the lord judge between thee and me; but
in his name, i charge you to depart out o' this house; an', gin it be
your will, dinna tak the braidside o't w'ye, but gang quietly out at
the door wi' your face foremost. wife, let naught o' this enchanter's
remain i' the house, to be a curse, an' a snare to us; gang an' bring
him his gildit weapon, an' may the lord protect a' his ain against its
hellish an' deadly point!"
the wife went to seek my poniard, trembling so excessively that she
could hardly walk, and, shortly after, we heard a feeble scream from
the pantry. the weapon had disappeared with the clothes, though under
double lock and key; and, the terror of the good people having now
reached a disgusting extremity, i thought proper to make a sudden
retreat, followed by the weaver's anathemas.
my state both of body and mind was now truly deplorable. i was hungry,
wounded, and lame, an outcast and a vagabond in society; my life sought
after with avidity, and all for doing that to which i was predestined
by him who fore-ordains whatever comes to pass. i knew not whither to
betake me. i had purposed going into england and there making some use
of the classical education i had received, but my lameness rendered
this impracticable for the present. i was therefore obliged to turn my
face towards edinburgh, where i was little known—where concealment was
more practicable than by skulking in the country, and where i might
turn my mind to something that was great and good. i had a little
money, both scotch and english, now in my possession, but not one
friend in the whole world on whom i could rely. one devoted friend, it
is true, i had, but he was become my greatest terror. to escape from
him, i now felt that i would willingly travel to the farthest corners
of the world, and be subjected to every deprivation; but after the
certainty of what had taken place last night, after i had travelled
thirty miles by secret and by-ways, i saw not how escape from him was
possible.
miserable, forlorn, and dreading every person that i saw, either behind
or before me, i hasted on towards edinburgh, taking all the by and
unfrequented paths; and, the third night after i left the weaver's
house, i reached the west port, without meeting with anything
remarkable. being exceedingly fatigued and lame, i took lodgings in the
first house i entered, and for these i was to pay two groats a week,
and to board and sleep with a young man who wanted a companion to make
his rent easier. i liked this; having found from experience that the
great personage who had attached himself to me, and was now become my
greatest terror among many surrounding evils, generally haunted me when
i was alone keeping aloof from all other society.
my fellow lodger came home in the evening, and was glad at my coming.
his name was linton, and i changed mine to elliot. he was a flippant
unstable being, one on whom nothing appeared a difficulty, in his own
estimation, but who could effect very little after all. he was what is
called by some a compositor, in the queen's printing house, then
conducted by a mr. james watson. in the course of our conversation that
night, i told him i was a first-rate classical scholar, and would
gladly turn my attention to some business wherein my education might
avail me something; and that there was nothing would delight me so much
as an engagement in the queen's printing office. linton made no
difficulty in bringing about that arrangement. his answer was: "oo, gud
sir, you are the very man we want. gud bless your breast and your
buttons, sir! aye, that's neither here nor there. that's all very well.
ha, ha, ha. a by-word in the house, sir. but, as i was saying, you are
the very man we want. you will get any money you like to ask, sir. any
money you like, sir. god bless your buttons!—that's settled—all
done—settled, settled—i'll do it, i'll do it—no more about it; no
more about it. settled, settled."
the next day i went with him to the office, and he presented me to mr.
watson as the most wonderful genius and scholar ever known. his
recommendation had little sway with mr. watson, who only smiled at
linton's extravagances, as one does at the prattle of an infant. i
sauntered about the printing office for the space of two or three
hours, during which time watson bustled about with green spectacles on
his nose, and took no heed of me. but, seeing that i still lingered, he
addressed me at length, in a civil gentlemanly way, and inquired
concerning my views. i satisfied him with all my answers, in particular
those to his questions about the latin and greek languages; but when he
came to ask testimonials of my character and acquirements, and found
that i could produce none, he viewed me with a jealous eye, and said he
dreaded i was some n'er-do-weel, run from my parents or guardians, and
he did not choose to employ any such. i said my parents were both dead;
and that, being thereby deprived of the means of following out my
education, it behoved me to apply to some business in which my
education might be of some use to me. he said he would take me into the
office, and pay me according to the business i performed and the manner
in which i deported myself; but he could take no man into her majesty's
printing office upon a regular engagement who could not produce the
most respectable references with regard to morals.
i could not but despise the man in my heart who laid such a stress upon
morals, leaving grace out of the question; and viewed it as a
deplorable instance of human depravity and self-conceit; but, for all
that, i was obliged to accept of his terms, for i had an inward thirst
and longing to distinguish myself in the great cause of religion, and i
thought, if once i could print my own works, how i would astonish
mankind, and confound their self-wisdom and their esteemed
morality—blow up the idea of any dependence on good works, and
morality, forsooth! and i weened that i might thus get me a name even
higher than if i had been made a general of the czar peter's troops
against the infidels.
i attended the office some hours every day, but got not much
encouragement, though i was eager to learn everything, and could soon
have set types considerably well. it was here that i first conceived
the idea of writing this journal, and having it printed, and applied to
mr. watson to print it for me, telling him it was a religious parable
such as the pilgrim's progress. he advised me to print it close, and
make it a pamphlet, and then, if it did not sell, it would not cost me
much; but that religious pamphlets, especially if they had a shade of
allegory in them, were the very rage of the day. i put my work to the
press, and wrote early and late; and encouraging my companion to work
at odd hours and on sundays, before the press-work of the second sheet
was begun, we had the work all in types, corrected, and a clean copy
thrown off for further revisal. the first sheet was wrought off; and i
never shall forget how my heart exulted when at the printing house this
day i saw what numbers of my works were to go abroad among mankind, and
i determined with myself that i would not put the border name of
elliot, which i had assumed, to the work.
thus far have my history and confessions been carried.
i must now furnish my christian readers with a key to the process,
management, and winding up of the whole matter; which i propose, by the
assistance of god, to limit to a very few pages.
chesters, july , .—my hopes and prospects are a wreck. my
precious journal is lost! consigned to the flames! my enemy hath found
me out, and there is no hope of peace or rest for me on this side the
grave.
in the beginning of last week, my fellow lodger came home, running in a
great panic, and told me a story of the devil having appeared twice in
the printing house, assisting the workmen at the printing of my book,
and that some of them had been frightened out of their wits. that the
story was told to mr. watson, who till that time had never paid any
attention to the treatise, but who, out of curiosity, began and read a
part of it, and thereupon flew into a great rage, called my work a
medley of lies and blasphemy, and ordered the whole to be consigned to
the flames, blaming his foreman, and all connected with the press, for
letting a work go so far that was enough to bring down the vengeance of
heaven on the concern.
if ever i shed tears through perfect bitterness of spirit it was at
that time, but i hope it was more for the ignorance and folly of my
countrymen than the overthrow of my own hopes. but my attention was
suddenly aroused to other matters, by linton mentioning that it was
said by some in the office the devil had inquired for me.
"surely you are not such a fool," said i, "as to believe that the devil
really was in the printing office?"
"oo, gud bless you, sir! saw him myself, gave him a nod, and good-day.
rather a gentlemanly personage—green circassian hunting coat and
turban—like a foreigner—has the power of vanishing in one moment
though—rather a suspicious circumstance that. otherwise, his
appearance not much against him."
if the former intelligence thrilled me with grief, this did so with
terror. i perceived who the personage was that had visited the printing
house in order to further the progress of my work; and, at the approach
of every person to our lodgings, i from that instant trembled every
bone, lest it should be my elevated and dreaded friend. i could not say
i had ever received an office at his hand that was not friendly, yet
these offices had been of a strange tendency; and the horror with which
i now regarded him was unaccountable to myself. it was beyond
description, conception, or the soul of man to bear. i took my printed
sheets, the only copy of my unfinished work existing; and, on pretence
of going straight to mr. watson's office, decamped from my lodgings at
portsburgh a little before the fall of evening, and took the road
towards england.
as soon as i got clear of the city, i ran with a velocity i knew not
before i had been capable of. i flew out the way towards dalkeith so
swiftly that i often lost sight of the ground, and i said to myself,
"oh, that i had the wings of a dove, that i might fly to the farthest
corners of the earth, to hide me from those against whom i have no
power to stand!"
i travelled all that night and the next morning, exerting myself beyond
my power; and about noon the following day i went into a yeoman's
house, the name of which was ellanshaws, and requested of the people a
couch of any sort to lie down on, for i was ill, and could not proceed
on my journey. they showed me to a stable-loft where there were two
beds, on one of which i laid me down; and, falling into a sound sleep,
i did not awake till the evening, that other three men came from the
fields to sleep in the same place, one of whom lay down beside me, at
which i was exceedingly glad. they fell all sound asleep, and i was
terribly alarmed at a conversation i overheard somewhere outside the
stable. i could not make out a sentence, but trembled to think i knew
one of the voices at least, and, rather than not be mistaken, i would
that any man had run me through with a sword. i fell into a cold sweat,
and once thought of instantly putting hand to my own life, as my only
means of relief (may the rash and sinful thought be in mercy forgiven!)
when i heard as it were two persons at the door, contending, as i
thought, about their right and interest in me. that the one was
forcibly preventing the admission of the other, i could hear
distinctly, and their language was mixed with something dreadful and
mysterious. in an agony of terror, i awakened my snoring companion with
great difficulty, and asked him, in a low whisper, who these were at
the door. the man lay silent and listening till fairly awake, and then
asked if i heard anything. i said i had heard strange voices contending
at the door.
"then i can tell you, lad, it has been something neither good nor
canny," said he. "it's no for naething that our horses are snorking
that gate."
for the first time, i remarked that the animals were snorting and
rearing as if they wished to break through the house. the man called to
them by their names, and ordered them to be quiet; but they raged still
the more furiously. he then roused his drowsy companions, who were
alike alarmed at the panic of the horses, all of them declaring that
they had never seen either mause or jolly start in their lives before.
my bed-fellow and another then ventured down the ladder, and i heard
one of them then saying: "lord be wi' us! what can be i' the house? the
sweat's rinning off the poor beasts like water."
they agreed to sally out together, and if possible to reach the kitchen
and bring a light. i was glad at this, but not so much so when i heard
the one man saying to the other, in a whisper: "i wish that stranger
man may be canny enough."
"god kens!" said the other. "it does nae look unco weel."
the lad in the other bed, hearing this, set up his head in manifest
affright as the other two departed for the kitchen; and, i believed he
would have been glad to have been in their company. this lad was next
the ladder, at which i was extremely glad, for, had he not been there,
the world should not have induced me to wait the return of these two
men. they were not well gone before i heard another distinctly enter
the stable, and come towards the ladder. the lad who was sitting up in
his bed, intent on the watch, called out: "wha's that there? walker, is
that you? purdie, i say is it you?"
the darkling intruder paused for a few moments, and then came towards
the foot of the ladder. the horses broke loose, and, snorting and
neighing for terror, raged through the house. in all my life i never
heard so frightful a commotion. the being that occasioned it all now
began to mount the ladder towards our loft, on which the lad in the bed
next the ladder sprung from his couch, crying out: "the l—d a—y
preserve us! what can it be?" with that he sped across the loft and by
my bed, praying lustily all the way; and, throwing himself from the
other end of the loft into a manger, he darted, naked as he was,
through among the furious horses, and, making the door that stood open,
in a moment he vanished and left me in the lurch. powerless with
terror, and calling out fearfully, i tried to follow his example; but,
not knowing the situation of the places with regard to one another, i
missed the manger, and fell on the pavement in one of the stalls. i was
both stunned and lamed on the knee; but, terror prevailing, i got up
and tried to escape. it was out of my power; for there were divisions
and cross divisions in the house, and mad horses smashing everything
before them, so that i knew not so much as on what side of the house
the door was. two or three times was i knocked down by the animals, but
all the while i never stinted crying out with all my power. at length,
i was seized by the throat and hair of the head, and dragged away, i
wist not whither. my voice was now laid, and all my powers, both mental
and bodily, totally overcome; and i remember no more till i found
myself lying naked on the kitchen table of the farm-house, and
something like a horse's rug thrown over me. the only hint that i got
from the people of the house on coming to myself was that my absence
would be good company; and that they had got me in a woeful state, one
which they did not choose to describe, or hear described.
as soon as day-light appeared, i was packed about my business, with the
hisses and execrations of the yeoman's family, who viewed me as a being
to be shunned, ascribing to me the visitations of that unholy night.
again was i on my way southwards, as lonely, hopeless, and degraded a
being as was to be found on life's weary round. as i limped out the
way, i wept, thinking of what i might have been, and what i really had
become: of my high and flourishing hopes when i set out as the avenger
of god on the sinful children of men; of all that i had dared for the
exaltation and progress of the truth; and it was with great difficulty
that my faith remained unshaken, yet was i preserved from that sin, and
comforted myself with the certainty that the believer's progress
through life is one of warfare and suffering.
my case was indeed a pitiable one. i was lame, hungry, fatigued, and my
resources on the very eve of being exhausted. yet these were but
secondary miseries, and hardly worthy of a thought compared with those
i suffered inwardly. i not only looked around me with terror at every
one that approached, but i was become a terror to myself, or, rather,
my body and soul were become terrors to each other; and, had it been
possible, i felt as if they would have gone to war. i dared not look at
my face in a glass, for i shuddered at my own image and likeness. i
dreaded the dawning, and trembled at the approach of night, nor was
there one thing in nature that afforded me the least delight.
in this deplorable state of body and mind, was i jogging on towards the
tweed, by the side of the small river called ellan, when, just at the
narrowest part of the glen, whom should i meet full in the face but the
very being in all the universe of god would the most gladly have
shunned. i had no power to fly fro him, neither durst i, for the spirit
within me, accuse him of falsehood and renounce his fellowship. i stood
before him like a condemned criminal, staring him in the face, ready to
be winded, twisted, and tormented as he pleased. he regarded me with a
sad and solemn look. how changed was now that majestic countenance to
one of haggard despair—changed in all save the extraordinary likeness
to my late brother, a resemblance which misfortune and despair tended
only to heighten. there were no kind greetings passed between us at
meeting, like those which pass between the men of the world; he looked
on me with eyes that froze the currents of my blood, but spoke not till
i assumed as much courage as to articulate: "you here! i hope you have
brought me tidings of comfort?"
"tidings of despair!" said he. "but such tidings as the timid and the
ungrateful deserve, and have reason to expect. you are an outlaw, and a
vagabond in your country, and a high reward is offered for your
apprehension. the enraged populace have burnt your house, and all that
is within it; and the farmers on the land bless themselves at being rid
of you. so fare it with everyone who puts his hand to the great work of
man's restoration to freedom, and draweth back, contemning the light
that is within him! your enormities caused me to leave you to yourself
for a season, and you see what the issue has been. you have given some
evil ones power over you, who long to devour you, both soul and body,
and it has required all my power and influence to save you. had it not
been for my hand, you had been torn in pieces last night; but for once
i prevailed. we must leave this land forthwith, for here there is
neither peace, safety, nor comfort for us. do you now and here pledge
yourself to one who has so often saved your life and has put his own at
stake to do so? do you pledge yourself that you will henceforth be
guided by my counsel, and follow me whithersoever i choose to lead?"
"i have always been swayed by your counsel," said i, "and for your
sake, principally, am i sorry that all our measures have proved
abortive. but i hope still to be useful in my native isle, therefore
let me plead that your highness will abandon a poor despised and
outcast wretch to his fate, and betake you to your realms, where your
presence cannot but be greatly wanted."
"would that i could do so!" said he woefully. "but to talk of that is
to talk of an impossibility. i am wedded to you so closely that i feel
as if i were the same person. our essences are one, our bodies and
spirits being united, so that i am drawn towards you as by magnetism,
and, wherever you are, there must my presence be with you."
perceiving how this assurance affected me, he began to chide me most
bitterly for my ingratitude; and then he assumed such looks that it was
impossible for me longer to bear them; therefore i staggered out of the
way, begging and beseeching of him to give me up to my fate, and hardly
knowing what i said; for it struck me that, with all his assumed
appearance of misery and wretchedness, there were traits of exultation
in his hideous countenance, manifesting a secret and inward joy at my
utter despair.
it was long before i durst look over my shoulder, but, when i did so, i
perceived this ruined and debased potentate coming slowly on the same
path, and i prayed that the lord would hide me in the bowels of the
earth or depths of the sea. when i crossed the tweed, i perceived him
still a little behind me; and, my despair being then at its height, i
cursed the time i first met with such a tormentor; though on a little
recollection it occurred that it was at that blessed time when i was
solemnly dedicated to the lord, and assured of my final election, and
confirmation, by an eternal decree never to be annulled. this being my
sole and only comfort, i recalled my curse upon the time, and repented
me o my rashness.
after crossing the tweed, i saw no more of my persecutor that day, and
had hopes that he had left me for a season; but, alas, what hope was
there of my relief after the declaration i had so lately heard! i took
up my lodgings that night in a small miserable inn in the village of
ancrum, of which the people seemed alike poor and ignorant. before
going to bed, i asked if it was customary with them to have family
worship of evenings. the man answered that they were so hard set with
the world they often could not get time, but if i would be so kind as
to officiate they would be much obliged to me. i accepted the
invitation, being afraid to go to rest lest the commotions of the
foregoing night might be renewed, and continued the worship as long as
in decency i could. the poor people thanked me, hoped my prayers would
be heard both on their account and my own, seemed much taken with my
abilities, and wondered how a man of my powerful eloquence chanced to
be wandering about in a condition so forlorn. i said i was a poor
student of theology, on my way to oxford. they stared at one another
with expressions of wonder, disappointment, and fear. i afterwards came
to learn that the term theology was by them quite misunderstood, and
that they had some crude conceptions that nothing was taught at oxford
but the black arts, which ridiculous idea prevailed over all the south
of scotland. for the present i could not understand what the people
meant, and less so when the man asked me, with deep concern: "if i was
serious in my intentions of going to oxford? he hoped not, and that i
would be better guided."
i said my education wanted finishing; but he remarked that the oxford
arts were a bad finish for a religious man's education. finally, i
requested him to sleep with me, or in my room all the night, as i
wanted some serious and religious conversation with him, and likewise
to convince him that the study of the fine arts, though not absolutely
necessary, were not incompatible with the character of a christian
divine. he shook his head, and wondered how i could call them fine
arts—hoped i did not mean to convince him by any ocular demonstration,
and at length reluctantly condescended to sleep with me, and let the
lass and wife sleep together for one night. i believe he would have
declined it had it not been some hints from his wife, stating that it
was a good arrangement, by which i understood there were only two beds
in the house, and that when i was preferred to the lass's bed, she had
one to shift for.
the landlord and i accordingly retired to our homely bed, and conversed
for some time about indifferent matters, till he fell sound asleep. not
so with me: i had that within which would not suffer me to close my
eyes; and, about the dead of night, i again heard the same noises and
contention begin outside the house as i had heard the night before; and
again i heard it was about a sovereign and peculiar right in me. at one
time the noise was on the top of the house, straight above our bed, as
if the one party were breaking through the roof, and the other forcibly
preventing it; at another it was at the door, and at a third time at
the window; but still mine host lay sound by my side, and did not
waken. i was seized with terrors indefinable, and prayed fervently, but
did not attempt rousing my sleeping companion until i saw if no better
could be done. the women, however, were alarmed, and, rushing into our
apartment, exclaimed that all the devils in hell were besieging the
house. then, indeed, the landlord awoke, and it was time for him, for
the tumult had increased to such a degree that it shook the house to
its foundations, being louder and more furious than i could have
conceived the heat of battle to be when the volleys of artillery are
mixed with groans, shouts, and blasphemous cursing. it thundered and
lightened; and there were screams, groans, laughter, and execrations,
all intermingled.
i lay trembling and bathed in a cold perspiration, but was soon obliged
to bestir myself, the inmates attacking me one after the other.
"oh, tam douglas! tam douglas! haste ye an' rise out frayont that
incarnal devil!" cried the wife. "ye are in ayont the auld ane himsel,
for our lass tibbie saw his cloven cloots last night."
"lord forbid!" roared tam douglas, and darted over the bed like a
flying fish. then, hearing the unearthly tumult with which he was
surrounded, he turned to the side of the bed, and addressed me thus,
with long and fearful intervals:
"if ye be the deil, rise up, an' depart in peace out o' this
house—afore the bedstrae take kindling about ye, an' than it'll maybe
be the waur for ye. get up—an' gang awa out amang your cronies, like a
good lad. there's nae body here wishes you ony ill. d'ye hear me?"
"friend," said i, "no christian would turn out a fellow creature on
such a night as this and in the midst of such a commotion of the
villagers."
"na, if ye be a mortal man," said he, "which i rather think, from the
use you made of the holy book. nane o' your practical jokes on
strangers an' honest foks. these are some o' your oxford tricks, an'
i'll thank you to be ower wi' them. gracious heaven, they are brikkin
through the house at a' the four corners at the same time!"
the lass tibby, seeing the innkeeper was not going to prevail with me
to rise, flew towards the bed in desperation, and, seizing me by the
waist, soon landed me on the floor, saying: "be ye deil, be ye chiel,
ye's no lie there till baith the house an' us be swallowed up!"
her master and mistress applauding the deed, i was obliged to attempt
dressing myself, a task to which my powers were quite inadequate in the
state i was in, but i was readily assisted by every one of the three;
and, as soon as they got my clothes thrust on in a loose way, they shut
their eyes lest they should see what might drive them distracted, and
thrust me out to the street, cursing me, and calling on the fiends to
take their prey and be gone.
the scene that ensued is neither to be described nor believed if it
were. i was momently surrounded by a number of hideous fiends, who
gnashed on me with their teeth, and clenched their crimson paws in my
face; and at the same instant i was seized by the collar of my coat
behind, by my dreaded and devoted friend, who pushed me on and, with
his gilded rapier waving and brandishing around me, defended me against
all their united attacks. horrible as my assailants were in appearance
(and they all had monstrous shapes) i felt that i would rather have
fallen into their hands than be thus led away captive by my defender at
his will and pleasure without having the right or power to say my life,
or any part of my will, was my own. i could not even thank him for his
potent guardianship, but hung down my head, and moved on i knew not
whither, like a criminal led to execution and still the infernal combat
continued till about the dawning, at which time i looked up, and all
the fiends were expelled but one, who kept at a distance; and still my
persecutor and defender pushed me by the neck before him.
at length he desired me to sit down and take some rest, with which i
complied, for i had great need of it, and wanted the power to withstand
what he desired. there, for a whole morning did he detain me,
tormenting me with reflections on the past, and pointing out the
horrors of the future, until a thousand times i wished myself
non-existent. "i have attached myself to your wayward fortune," said
he, "and it has been my ruin as well as thine. ungrateful as you are, i
cannot give you up to be devoured; but this is a life that it is
impossible to brook longer. since our hopes are blasted in this world,
and all our schemes of grandeur overthrown; and since our everlasting
destiny is settled by a decree which no act of ours can invalidate, let
us fall by our own hands, or by the hands of each other; die like
heroes; and, throwing off this frame of dross and corruption, mingle
with the pure ethereal essence of existence, from which we derived our
being."
i shuddered at a view of the dreadful alternative, yet was obliged to
confess that in my present circumstances existence was not to be borne.
it was in vain that i reasoned on the sinfulness of the deed, and on
its damning nature; he made me condemn myself out of my own mouth, by
allowing the absolute nature of justifying grace and the impossibility
of the elect ever falling from the faith, or the glorious end to which
they were called; and then he said, this granted, self-destruction was
the act of a hero, and none but a coward would shrink from it, to
suffer a hundred times more every day and night that passed over his
head.
i said i was still contented to be that coward; and all that i begged
of him was to leave me to my fortune for a season, and to the just
judgement of my creator; but he said his word and honour were engaged
on my behalf, and these, in such a case, were not to be violated. "if
you will not pity yourself, have pity on me," added he. "turn your eyes
on me, and behold to what i am reduced."
involuntarily did i turn at the request, and caught a half glance of
his features. may no eye destined to reflect the beauties of the new
jerusalem inward upon the beatific soul behold such a sight as mine
then beheld! my immortal spirit, blood and bones, were all withered at
the blasting sight; and i arose and withdrew, with groanings which the
pangs of death shall never wring from me.
not daring to look behind me, i crept on my way, and that night reached
this hamlet on the scottish border; and being grown reckless of danger,
and hardened to scenes of horror, i took up my lodging with a poor
hind, who is a widower, and who could only accommodate me with a bed of
rushes at his fireside. at midnight i heard some strange sounds, too
much resembling those to which i had of late been inured; but they kept
at a distance, and i was soon persuaded that there was a power
protected that house superior to those that contended for or had the
mastery over me. overjoyed at finding such an asylum, i remained in the
humble cot. this is the third day i have lived under the roof, freed of
my hellish assailants, spending my time in prayer, and writing out this
my journal, which i have fashioned to stick in with my printed work,
and to which i intend to add portions while i remain in this pilgrimage
state, which, i find too well, cannot be long.
august , .—this morning the hind has brought me word from
redesdale, whither he had been for coals, that a stranger gentleman had
been traversing that country, making the most earnest inquiries after
me, or one of the same appearance; and, from the description that he
brought of this stranger, i could easily perceive who it was. rejoicing
that my tormentor has lost traces of me for once, i am making haste to
leave my asylum, on pretence of following this stranger, but in reality
to conceal myself still more completely from his search. perhaps this
may be the last sentence ever i am destined to write. if so, farewell,
christian reader! may god grant to thee a happier destiny than has been
allotted to me here on earth, and the same assurance of acceptance
above! amen.
ault-righ, august , .—here am i, set down on the open moor to
add one sentence more to my woeful journal; and, then, farewell, all
beneath the sun!
on leaving the hind's cottage on the border, i hasted to the
north-west, because in that quarter i perceived the highest and wildest
hills before me. as i crossed the mountains above hawick, i exchanged
clothes with a poor homely shepherd, whom i found lying on a hill-side,
singing to himself some woeful love ditty. he was glad of the change,
and proud of his saintly apparel; and i was no less delighted with
mine, by which i now supposed myself completely disguised; and i found
moreover that in this garb of a common shepherd i was made welcome in
every house. i slept the first night in a farm-house nigh to the church
of roberton, without hearing or seeing aught extraordinary; yet i
observed next morning that all the servants kept aloof from me, and
regarded me with looks of aversion. the next night i came to this
house, where the farmer engaged me as a shepherd; and, finding him a
kind, worthy, and religious man, i accepted of his terms with great
gladness. i had not, however, gone many times to the sheep, before all
the rest of the shepherds told my master that i knew nothing about
herding, and begged of him to dismiss me. he perceived too well the
truth of their intelligence; but, being much taken with my learning and
religious conversation, he would not put me away, but set me to herd
his cattle.
it was lucky for me that before i came here a report had prevailed,
perhaps for an age, that this farm-house was haunted at certain seasons
by a ghost. i say it was lucky for me for i had not been in it many
days before the same appalling noises began to prevail around me about
midnight, often continuing till near the dawning. still they kept
aloof, and without doors; for this gentleman's house, like the cottage
i was in formerly, seemed to be a sanctuary from all demoniacal power.
he appears to be a good man and a just, and mocks at the idea of
supernatural agency, and he either does not hear these persecuting
spirits or will not acknowledge it, though of late he appears much
perturbed.
the consternation of the menials has been extreme. they ascribe all to
the ghost, and tell frightful stories of murders having been committed
there long ago. of late, however, they are beginning to suspect that it
is i that am haunted; and, as i have never given them any satisfactory
account of myself, they are whispering that i am a murderer, and
haunted by the spirits of those i have slain.
august .—this day i have been informed that i am to be banished the
dwelling-house by night, and to sleep in an outhouse by myself, to try
if the family can get any rest when freed of my presence. i have
peremptorily refused acquiescence, on which my master's brother struck
me, and kicked me with his foot. my body being quite exhausted by
suffering, i am grown weak and feeble both in mind and bodily frame,
and actually unable to resent any insult or injury. i am the child of
earthly misery and despair, if ever there was one existent. my master
is still my friend; but there are so many masters here, and everyone of
them alike harsh to me, that i wish myself in my grave every hour of
the day. if i am driven from the family sanctuary by night, i know i
shall be torn in pieces before morning; and then who will deign or dare
to gather up my mangled limbs, and give me honoured burial?
my last hour is arrived: i see my tormentor once more approaching me in
this wild. oh, that the earth would swallow me up, or the hill fall and
cover me! farewell for ever!
september , .—my devoted, princely, but sanguine friend has been
with me again and again. my time is expired and i find a relief beyond
measure, for he has fully convinced me that no act of mine can mar the
eternal counsel, or in the smallest degree alter or extenuate one event
which was decreed before the foundations of the world were laid. he
said he had watched over me with the greatest anxiety, but, perceiving
my rooted aversion towards him, he had forborne troubling me with his
presence. but now, seeing that i was certainly to be driven from my
sanctuary that night, and that there would be a number of infernals
watching to make a prey of my body, he came to caution me not to
despair, for that he would protect me at all risks, if the power
remained with him. he then repeated an ejaculatory prayer, which i was
to pronounce, if in great extremity. i objected to the words as
